Technological Forecasting & Social Change 198 (2024) 122942
Available online 3 November 2023
0040-1625/© 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-
nc-nd/4.0/).
Micro-foundations of digital innovation capability – A mixed method 
approach to develop and validate a multi-dimensional 
measurement instrument 
Julia Kroh
a , *
, Dietfried Globocnik
b
, Carsten Schultz
a
, Frederike Holdhof
a
, S ø ren Salomo
c 
a
Kiel University, Institute for Innovation Research, Westring 425, 24118 Kiel, Germany 
b
Alpen-Adria Universitaet, Department of Innovation Management and Entrepreneurship, Universitaetsstrasse 65-67, 9020 Klagenfurt, Austria 
c
Berlin Institute of Technology, Institute for Technology and Innovation Management, Stra ß e des 17, Juni 135, 10623 Berlin, Germany   
ARTICLE INFO  
Keywords: 
Digital innovation capabilities 
Digital innovation 
Established companies 
Scale development 
Dynamic capability view 
ABSTRACT  
Digital innovation refers to the creation or adoption value-adding novelty through the incorporation of digital 
technology. Digital innovation challenges established product-centric companies whose innovation management 
capabilities are insufficient to manage the reconfiguration and transformation necessary for digital innovation 
and technology. Recent research has introduced different concepts of for example, digital readiness, digitaliza -
tion capabilities, and digital innovation readiness. However, these concepts have two shortcomings for use in 
practice and empirical research: most concepts are theoretical in nature, with limited empirically validated 
measures. As such, this study takes a dynamic capability view to synthesize prior literature on the organizational 
antecedents of digital innovation and develops a framework for the micro-foundations of digital innovation 
capability. By applying a mixed-method approach, existing concepts are extended through qualitative research 
and then translated into a multi-dimensional measurement instrument. This multi-item operationalization is then 
subjected to scale validation using quantitative research methods. The results show that a company's digital 
innovation capability is founded upon seven micro-foundations – digital focus, digital innovation process, digital 
mindset, digital innovation network, digital technology capability, data management, and overcoming digital 
innovation resistance – that facilitate established companies in sensing, seizing, and reconfiguring digital 
innovation.   
1. Introduction 
Digital innovation refers to “ the creation or adoption, and exploita -
tion of an inherently unbounded, value-adding novelty through the 
incorporation of digital technology ” ( Hund et al., 2021:6 ) whereas the 
possible outcomes can take the form of, for instance, new products, 
services, processes, or business models. New digital technologies, such 
as artificial intelligence, cloud, mobile, social media, and business an -
alytics, significantly impact how an organization creates and captures 
value ( Lanzolla et al., 2020 ), operates its routine and innovation pro -
cesses ( Füller et al., 2022 ; Rauch et al., 2020 ), and organizes the 
workplace ( Marsh et al., 2022 ). Many digital technologies are accessible 
from third parties on demand, have numerous flexible and scalable 
application areas, and enable new linkages with customers, suppliers, 
and other network partners ( Lokuge et al., 2019 ). 
Digital innovation often results in a new combination of digital and 
physical components drawing on digitalization (i.e., the encoding of 
analog information into a digital format), which allows products to 
become programmable, addressable, sensible, communicable, memo -
rable, traceable, and associable ( Yoo, 2010 ). Digital innovations offer 
companies the possibility of establishing layered product architectures, 
consisting of device, network, service, and content layers ( Benkler, 
2008 ), and customers can be provided with digital platform-based ser -
vices ( Hilbolling et al., 2020 ). This also facilitates new market players to 
compete, or even change the competitive landscape of an industry 
( Autio et al., 2018 ). Consequently, digital innovations have the potential 
to disrupt the product-centric business models of established companies 
in industries such as mechanical engineering, which have traditionally 
* Corresponding author. 
E-mail addresses: kroh@bwl.uni-kiel.de (J. Kroh), dietfried.globocnik@aau.at (D. Globocnik), schultz@bwl.uni-kiel.de (C. Schultz), holdhof@bwl.uni-kiel.de 
(F. Holdhof), salomo@tu-berlin.de (S. Salomo).  
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Technological Forecasting & Social Change 
journal homep age: www.el sevier.com/l ocate/techfore 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2023.122942 
Received 8 November 2022; Received in revised form 18 October 2023; Accepted 19 October 2023   
Technological Forecasting & Social Change 198 (2024) 122942
2
developed, manufactured, and sold physical products by blurring the 
boundaries between digital and non-digital business models ( de Massis 
et al., 2018 ; Williams et al., 2022 ). Therefore, this article addresses the 
following research question: Which micro-foundations build a digital 
innovation capability for established companies and therewith enable them to 
reinterpret and reconfigure their knowledge, resources, routines, and capa -
bilities to take advantage of the changes caused by new digital technologies? 
The layered nature of digital technology increases the complexity of 
innovation activities ( Tuomi, 2002 ). Digital innovation requires stake -
holder contributions to a heterogeneous ecosystem inside and outside a 
company ( Nambisan et al., 2019 ). This increases the requirement for 
cross-functional collaboration between different departments and dis -
ciplines. Digital innovation also requires a wide spectrum of partners, 
including collaborations with specialized vendors (hardware, software, 
and IT solutions), suppliers, and customers in an open ecosystem ( Abrell 
et al., 2016 ; Füller et al., 2022 ; Yoo et al., 2010 ). Consequently, digital 
innovation and the underlying technologies are often not controlled by a 
single company but involve different – and sometimes even temporarily 
– affiliated partners ( Lyytinen et al., 2016 ; Yoo et al., 2012 ). Such digital 
innovation and value creation networks not only add further complexity 
to innovation activities, but also create uncertainty about relevant 
partners, competitors, and potential customers ( Wirtz et al., 2022 ), and 
how to organize innovation in such an environment ( Hanelt et al., 
2021 ). Therefore, traditional innovation management practices might 
not suffice for digital innovation ( Rindfleisch et al., 2017 ), which may 
require a specific set of capabilities to succeed ( Appio et al., 2021 ; 
D ą browska et al., 2022 ). 
These characteristics of digital innovation are particularly critical for 
established companies, which are the focus of this study. Past research 
reports that despite existing innovation capabilities for non-digital 
products, services, and processes. Incumbents tend to struggle to 
develop innovations in general ( K ¨onig et al., 2013 ), especially digital 
ones, which fundamentally change opportunities to create value ( Ceipek 
et al., 2021 ; Rummel et al., 2022 ). Digital startups and software com -
panies have a native, default, and foundational focus on digital busi -
nesses. Their digital innovation capabilities enabling them to start and 
grow a purely digital business, which are built from scratch, might not 
represent those that are necessary for established companies. They 
require a set of digital innovation capabilities that enable a continuous 
reinterpretation of the status quo; reconfiguring their own resource 
base, routines, and capabilities; and transforming them based on the 
newly identified opportunities provided by created or emerging digital 
technologies ( D ą browska et al., 2022 ). This digital innovation capability 
is a pre-requisite for generating the new digital innovations necessary to 
enter, develop, and grow established companies` digital businesses. 
In the search for critical capabilities enabling digital innovation in 
established companies, recent research has introduced the concepts of 
digital readiness ( Gfrerer et al., 2021 ), digitalization capabilities 
( Annarelli et al., 2021 ), digital innovation readiness ( Lokuge et al., 
2019 ), organization-level factors of digital transformation ( D ą browska 
et al., 2022 ), digital innovation management ( Nambisan et al., 2017 ), 
competing digital innovation concerns ( Svahn et al., 2017a ), strategic 
digital innovation orientation ( Kindermann et al., 2020 ), and AI-based 
innovation management ( Füller et al., 2022 ). These concepts have two 
shortcomings for use in practice and empirical research: most concepts 
are theoretical in nature, with limited empirically validated measures (e. 
g., Lokuge et al., 2019 ). Furthermore, these concepts organize various 
resources, capabilities, and competences, similar to the traditional 
innovation literature, molded into the digital innovation space. Given 
the particular context of established product-centric companies that 
must transform, rather than improve, their existing businesses due to 
new digital technologies, the concept of digital innovation capability for 
established companies must consider what is needed to enable them to 
reinterpret and reconfigure their knowledge, resources, routines, and 
capabilities. Therefore, we aim to develop and validate a new concep -
tualization of digital innovation capability by taking a dynamic 
capability view ( Teece, 2007 ) and determining the micro-foundations 
necessary to transform – that is, to sense, seize, and reconfigure – digital 
innovation opportunities and resources ( Bj ¨orkdahl, 2020 ). 
By applying a mixed-method approach, we revisit the existing liter -
ature to extract the relevant micro-foundations of digital innovation 
capability that enable a company's digital change and renewal. The 
initial conceptualization was then tested and refined through a quali -
tative study on a sample of established companies. The qualitative data 
also supported the subsequent development of a multi-dimensional 
multi-item measurement instrument, which was then subjected to 
quantitative scale validation using survey data collected from two 
different geographical regions. Responding to the call for research on 
new realities in the digital age ( Menz et al., 2021 ) and the foundations 
necessary to innovate in the digital world ( D ą browska et al., 2022 ), we 
contribute to the literature by determining seven micro-foundations of 
digital innovation capability for established companies: digital focus, 
digital innovation process, digital mindset, digital innovation network, 
digital technology capability, data management, and overcoming digital 
innovation resistance. Furthermore, we provide future research with a 
reliable and valid measurement instrument tested across different re -
gions for psychometric equivalence. 
The next section explains the dynamic capability view, micro- 
foundations of the digital innovation capability and includes a struc -
tured overview of prior conceptualizations of digital innovation capa -
bilities. Following this, the methodology for the scale development is 
presented. The section thereafter describes the data collection, analysis, 
and the results of the qualitative study, followed by data collection, 
analysis, and results of the quantitative study, presenting the digital 
innovation capability scale. The final section contains the discussion, 
implications, and future research. 
2. Theoretical background 
2.1. A dynamic capability view of digital innovation capability 
The dynamic capability view explains how companies can adapt and 
thrive in a rapidly changing business environment and sustain 
competitive advantage. Therefore, the approach fits well within the 
context of established product-centric companies that transform their 
businesses into digital spaces. This approach proposes three 
organizational-level capabilities that enable this dynamic adaptation. 
Sensing involves continuously scanning the external environment for 
new opportunities and threats. Seizing refers to grasping opportunities 
through innovation, creativity, or strategic alliances. Reconfiguring is 
the ability to change an organization's structure, processes, and resource 
base to successfully exploit new opportunities ( Teece et al., 1997 ). In 
addition to the capabilities themselves, a company's success depends on 
how managers use these dynamic capabilities ( Eisenhardt and Martin, 
2000 ). 
Therefore, we interpret digital innovation capability as a dynamic 
capability rather than a contextualized form of “ functional ” innovation 
capability. The latter also includes the improvement and development of 
existing products, services, and business processes that operate under 
stable conditions. “ Dynamic ” capabilities refer to the ability to create, 
extend, and modify a company's knowledge and resource base to 
respond to changes in (or even proactively shape) the environment and 
competitive landscape ( Helfat et al., 2007 ), as required when estab -
lished product-centric companies must reconfigure to transform into 
hybrid or digital businesses. Micro-foundations of a dynamic capability 
are the skills, procedures, mechanisms, structures, and resources un -
derlying sensing, seizing, and reconfiguring capabilities. They are rooted 
in the cognitive and behavioral processes of individuals within an or -
ganization, including their learning processes, problem-solving abilities, 
and decision-making styles. They also involve the social and cultural 
aspects of the organization, such as the norms and values that shape the 
interactions between individuals and teams. Additionally, the micro- 
J. Kroh et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Technological Forecasting & Social Change 198 (2024) 122942
3
foundations of dynamic capabilities include organizational structures 
and systems that support learning and adaptation (Teece, 2007). 
Consequently, the conceptualization of digital innovation capability 
as a dynamic capability requires the identification of relevant micro- 
foundations that enable established companies to sense, seize, and 
reconfigure, to take advantage of the new opportunities provided by 
digital technologies. 
2.2. Micro-foundations of digital innovation capability 
Table 1 provides an overview of prior concepts about the 
organizational-level factors of established companies that are necessary 
to utilize digital technologies. The table therefore includes articles that 
focus on digital readiness and digital innovation capabilities. 
Digital readiness (Gfrerer et al., 2021) emphasizes organizational- 
level factors that enable digital transformation, including digital 
empowerment and involvement of employees by managers, appropriate 
organizational structures, digitally experienced managers, willingness 
to act on digital trends, and absence of barriers, such as a lack of inno -
vation culture or technology skills, budgetary or legal restrictions and 
leadership buy-in. Annarelli et al. (2021) conceptualized digitalization 
capabilities enabling digital transformation as a higher-order dynamic 
capability with underlying capabilities like formalized routines that 
effectively utilize digital resources. The management of digital 
ecosystem partnerships and supply chain integration enables the orga -
nization to sense new opportunities, foster digital processes, to use IT 
resources, and to integrate them with non-IT resources. Managers' 
cognition of the relevance of change through digitalization determines 
how the company (i) seizes digital capabilities, (ii) reconfigures the 
resources to enable digital innovation in a timely manner, and (iii) acts 
promptly on newly observed trends in the digital environment through 
the help of improvisational capabilities, thereby enabling the company 
to reconfigure its digital resources and routines. In their literature re -
view, Dąbrowska et al. (2022) investigate the phenomenon of digital 
transformation at the individual, organizational, ecosystem, and 
geopolitical levels. Organizational-level digital transformation requires the 
company to consider, or respond to digital technologies in four main 
areas:  
i) a change in corporate strategy due to the significant changes 
caused by digital technologies on internal processes, product of -
fering, value chain partners, and competitive landscape; 
ii) organizational designs that facilitate the orchestration, collabo -
ration, and coordination of internal and external partners, which 
are necessary to cope with the additional complexity of creating 
and implementing digital innovations;  
iii) digital capabilities to use new technologies for faster information 
processing and better, more objective decision-making, based on 
data; and  
iv) changes in value creation and logic, to cope with additional 
complexity when orchestrating multiple ecosystem partners and 
taking advantage of new opportunities on how to lower 
competitive pressure. 
In their conceptual work on digital innovation management, Nambisan 
et al. (2017) argued that digitalization challenges the assumptions of 
traditional innovation management. The authors suggest new “logics,” 
rather than specific skills or capabilities, as necessary to address these 
challenges: dynamic problem-solution pairing, instead of linear inno -
vation processes, wherein digital innovation is: (i) a constant process of 
generation, merging, and refinement to achieve need-solution fit; (ii) 
socio-cognitive sensemaking necessary for all actors to frame the po -
tential and value of digital technologies and change their understanding 
of possible innovation outcomes; (iii) technology affordability and 
constraints, which consider that the same digital technology can be 
repurposed by different actors or used to produce different innovation 
outcomes; (iv) orchestration emphasizing the role of digital technologies 
to integrate the activities of diverse internal and external parties. In their 
organizational setup for AI-based innovation management of the company, 
Füller et al. (2022) determined three factors: (i) employees skilled in 
digital and AI technologies, (ii) organizational structures allowing rapid 
and effective response to major transformations and integration of in -
ternal and external actors for collaboration, and (iii) an innovation 
strategy with ambitious AI goals and program activities to achieve them. 
The concept of strategic digital innovation orientation (Kindermann 
et al., 2020) defines four dimensions that capture the strategic posture of 
a company concerning digital innovation: digital technology scope de -
scribes the company-specific set of technologies that determine the 
extent to which digitally enabled value for customers can be created; 
digital capabilities are the organizational routines for a set of technol -
ogies rooted in employees' technology skills and knowledge; digital 
ecosystem coordination enables effective interaction with other stake -
holders on platforms in open technology ecosystems; and digital archi -
tecture configuration describes how the company organizes its 
technological infrastructure and working processes to effectively utilize 
and repurpose technologies. To develop the concept of digital innovation 
readiness, Lokuge et al. (2019) considered an organizational change 
perspective and identified factors that determine an organization's 
readiness for digital innovation. These entail resources (innovation re -
sources and IT infrastructure), a facilitating climate for the integration of 
IT into innovation considerations and motivation to engage in innova -
tion in general, partnerships with external experts, and clear strategic 
goals for digital innovations. While exploring the primary competing 
digital innovation concerns of incumbent companies, and the strategies 
to remedy them, Svahn et al. (2017a,b) highlight four areas: the 
development of new digital capabilities without jeopardizing estab -
lished product innovation practices; a balance between continuous 
improvement of existing solutions by leveraging digital technology, and 
new development of products and services; a balance between existing 
internal work arrangements and engaging external partners and re -
sources; governance structures with less hierarchical control; and more 
flexibility to freely explore digital opportunities. 
These conceptualizations focus on different facets of organizational 
change driven by digital technologies (e.g., digitalization, digital 
transformation, and AI in innovation management) but overlap in how 
they organize the necessary company-level skills, procedures, mecha -
nisms, structures, and resources. To determine the relevant micro- 
foundations of digital innovation capability, we synthesize these 
frameworks, through a dynamic capability lens, into five factors that 
enable an established company to sense, seize, and transform: 
Digital focus emphasizes explicit digital innovation goals and a formal 
digital innovation strategy (Lokuge et al., 2019) to guide employees in 
their innovation-related decisions and activities. The technological 
scope that directly influences the underlying business model (Schallmo 
et al., 2022) and might require a full reconfiguration of a company's 
strategy (Dąbrowska et al., 2022; D'Ippolito et al., 2019), specifically, 
needs to be defined. Digital focus is also expressed in clear roles and 
responsibilities for digital innovations, as well as in a flexible infra -
structure, and financial and human resources necessary for imple -
mentation (Chen et al., 2017; Füller et al., 2022). Therefore, digital focus 
is a micro-foundation of digital innovation capability that defines search 
areas for sensing opportunities, guides strategic innovation portfolios 
and project selection decisions for seizing opportunities, and reconfig -
ures them by aligning resources with the digital innovation strategy. 
The digital innovation process is characterized by mechanisms that 
support agile and flexible development processes. Organizational agil -
ity, adaptability, and ambidexterity are crucial for quickly responding to 
changes in the environment, and are particularly relevant for digital 
innovation output and economic performance (Del Giudice et al., 2021; 
Troise et al., 2022). Moderate levels of formal control, coupled with 
agile and flexible innovation process designs, seem particularly prom -
ising for digital innovation development (Lane and Lubatkin, 1998; 
J. Kroh et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Technological Forecasting & Social Change 198 (2024) 122942
4
Table 1 
Overview of prior conceptualizations of digital innovation capabilities.  
Concept/Author Research objective Key dimensions Research method Theoretical foundation 
Digital readiness 
Gfrerer et al. (2021) 
Systematic differences in digital readiness 
perceptions among hierarchical levels 
Organizational level 
- Digital empowerment 
- Digital involvement 
- Appropriate 
organizational structures 
- Digitally experienced 
managers 
- Willingness to act on 
digital trends 
- Innovation barriers and 
reaction speed 
Individual level 
- Individual beliefs 
(readiness, attitudes) 
- Individual competences 
(knowhow, skills) 
Empirical (banking industry) Change readiness 
framework 
Digitalization capabilities 
Annarelli et al. (2021) 
Identification of antecedents, consequences, and 
capabilities underlying higher-order digitalization 
capability 
Sensing 
- Ecosystem capabilities 
- Supply chain process 
integration 
Seizing 
- Employing 
heterogeneous resources 
- Deploying IT 
- Role of managerial 
cognition driving change 
- Organizing IT 
capabilities 
Reconfiguring 
- Improvisational 
capabilities 
- Scanning evolution of 
digital environment 
- Timely reconfiguration 
of resources 
Literature review (co-citation 
analysis) 
Dynamic capability 
view 
Digital innovation readiness  
Lokuge et al. (2019) 
Conceptualization of a formative multi-dimensional 
construct for organizational readiness enabling 
digital innovation 
- Resource readiness 
- IT readiness 
- Cognitive readiness 
- Partnership readiness 
- Innovation valance 
- Cultural readiness 
- Strategic readiness 
Mixed methods approach 
(qualitative and quantitative data) 
Organizational 
readiness for change 
theory 
Digital innovation 
management  
Nambisan et al. (2017) 
Theorize digital innovation management - Dynamic problem- 
solution pairing 
- Socio-cognitive sense 
making 
- Technology affordances 
and constraints 
- Orchestration 
Conceptual Diverse innovation 
theories 
Organizational-level digital 
transformation  
Dąbrowska et al. (2022) 
Development of multi-level framework for digital 
transformation and agenda for future research 
- Strategy and strategic 
response 
- Change and 
organizational design 
- Decision-making 
capabilities 
- Change in value 
creation and capture 
Conceptual Diverse digital 
transformation 
approaches 
Competing digital 
innovation concerns 
Svahn et al. (2017a,b) 
Digital innovation concerns and how to manage 
them 
Competing Concerns: 
- Capability: Existing vs. 
requisite 
- Innovation focus: 
Product vs. process 
- Collaboration: Internal 
vs. external 
- Governance: Control vs. 
flexibility 
Longitudinal case study  
Strategic digital innovation 
orientation 
Kindermann et al. (2020) 
Development of holistic concept of an organization's 
strategic orientation concerning digital innovation 
and transformation initiatives 
- Digital technology 
scope 
- Digital capabilities 
- Digital ecosystem 
coordination 
- Digital architecture 
configuration 
Computer-aided text analysis of 
shareholder letters from US-based 
companies over 16 years 
Resource-based view 
(continued on next page) 
J. Kroh et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Technological Forecasting & Social Change 198 (2024) 122942
5
Schultz et al., 2019 ; Svahn et al., 2017b ). Agility allows for the constant 
consideration and integration of new digital innovation opportunities in 
the innovation process, wherein their potential is explored through 
improvisation ( Annarelli et al., 2021 ) as well as rapid iterative experi -
mentation and development cycles ( Nambisan et al., 2017 ; Pe ˜na H ¨aufler 
et al., 2021 ). Therefore, a flexible digital innovation process that sup -
ports the constant search for and exploration of digital innovations 
provides a micro-foundation for sensing and seizing opportunities. 
A digital mindset considers that possessing resources and practices for 
digital innovation may not be sufficient. It requires shared under -
standing and knowledge among employees and managers about the 
potential of digital technologies, to recognize, and respond to, emerging 
trends ( Huber et al., 2020 ; Nambisan et al., 2017 ). Profound and broadly 
shared digital knowledge increases employees' self-efficacy in using 
digital technologies and, therefore, their digital innovativeness ( Mancha 
and Shankaranarayanan, 2020 ). Furthermore, an entrepreneurial 
climate is needed so that employees are motivated and empowered to 
proactively explore new digital opportunities ( Lokuge et al., 2019 ; 
D ą browska et al., 2022 ). Therefore, a digital mindset is a relevant micro- 
foundation for seizing digital opportunities. 
Digital technology adoption and data management subsume the re -
sources and activities necessary to use data for value creation. Digital 
innovation requires not only appropriate physical resources in the form 
of the necessary IT infrastructure and digital platforms ( Sedera et al., 
2016 ; Yoo et al., 2012 ), but also the ability to utilize them. The latter 
refers to IT-enabled routines and the ability to collect, analyze, and 
interpret data from different sources ( Huber et al., 2020 ). Clear re -
sponsibilities and coordination mechanisms orchestrate the process of 
accessing and generating data for interpretation. This should eventually 
support more objective, data-driven decision making ( D ą browska et al., 
2022 ). Furthermore, IT infrastructure must be adapted to respond to 
changes in the technological environment ( Chen et al., 2017 ). This re -
quires the company to develop the ability to recognize new digital 
technologies and the value of new data sources. Therefore, digital 
technology adoption and data management is an essential micro- 
foundation of digital innovation capability, as it supports, (i) sensing 
new opportunities by creating data-driven insights, (ii) seizing oppor -
tunities by improving innovation decision-making, and (iii) trans -
forming by leveraging new businesses through new data sources, and 
constantly renewing the digital technology base underlying digital 
innovation. 
Digital innovation network accounts for the need for companies to 
engage in digital innovation and cooperate with different partners, 
including IT vendors, consultants, suppliers, complementors, and cus -
tomers ( Abrell et al., 2016 ). This requires mechanisms to assess which 
technology should originate internally ( Muehlburger et al., 2022 ), and 
which should originate externally, from partners, if internal knowledge 
is insufficient ( Hanelt et al., 2021 ; Kindermann et al., 2020 ). Therefore, 
a company must open up its innovation process and facilitate collabo -
ration with external partners. However, in the context of digital inno -
vation, such collaborations differ from traditional customer-supplier 
relationships. Partnerships are often temporary, non-exclusive, and not 
controlled by a single company ( Lyytinen et al., 2016 ). For instance, 
digital platforms bring together an ecosystem of heterogeneous actors 
who innovate and collaboratively create value ( Yoo et al., 2012 ). This 
requires the ability to orchestrate the partners of such heterogeneous 
networks ( Svahn et al., 2017b ; Urbinati et al., 2020 ), by cultivating 
governance structures that allow collaborative innovation, knowledge 
sharing, and joint value creation and capture (e.g., Kindermann et al., 
2020 ). Therefore, the ability to establish and orchestrate a network of 
partners is a micro-foundation of digital innovation capability that 
supports sensing new opportunities by learning about new digital 
technological and business possibilities from outside the company, 
seizing these opportunities through collaboration with external part -
ners, and transforming the company's structures, processes, and re -
sources by organizing them in ecosystems. 
This literature-based conceptualization of the micro-foundations of 
digital innovation capability is the initial point for subsequent scale 
development. 
3. Method for scale development 
We used an exploratory sequential mixed method approach ( Cres -
well, 1994 ), thereby following an established scale development pro -
cedure ( Churchill, 1979 ; Hinkin, 1995 ). Accordingly, this study builds 
on our initial literature-based conceptualization of the micro- 
foundations of digital innovation capability. Due to the novelty of the 
phenomenon and our chosen theoretical lens, we conducted a qualita -
tive study (Study 1) to derive and detail the specific micro-foundations 
that need to be included in our measurement instrument, following the 
suggested evaluation guidelines of qualitative research ( Goffin et al., 
2019 ). This method allowed us to explore in depth the relevance and 
limitations of our initial conceptualization of digital innovation capa -
bility, and to operationalize the measurement instrument ( Eisenhardt, 
1989 ; Leonard-Barton, 1990 ). The qualitative analysis results formed 
the basis for developing the items of the multi-dimensional measure of 
our digital innovation capability scale. We then validated the scale by 
drawing on quantitative survey data (Study 2), following the established 
approach of scale purification and the assessment of structural validity, 
convergent validity, and structural invariance between different 
geographical contexts ( Hinkin, 1998 ). 
3.1. Study 1: qualitative scale development 
3.1.1. Procedure and sample 
To this end, we considered three relevant cases for qualitative scale 
development ( Cappa et al., 2022 ) pertaining to three established com -
panies in North Germany. We selected these three cases for the following 
reasons. (i) All established companies have already started to shift their 
business focus to include digital technologies in their products, and offer 
digital services. (ii) As the majority of other medium-sized companies 
have a long tradition of selling physical products and certainly face 
challenges when they start using digital technologies, they tend to be 
risk averse ( Ceipek et al., 2021 ). Thus, they reflect the transformation 
from analogous to digital innovation. (iii) The three cases share 
important similarities (e.g., company history and German headquarters' 
location) but show important differences (e.g., industry, number of 
employees, current digital innovation ability, and innovation success), 
which is crucial for the external validity of the results ( Flick et al., 2004 ). 
Consequently, the nature of the three cases is consistent with the aim of 
analyzing and discussing the phenomenon ( Siggelkow, 2007 ). There -
fore, we employed maximum variation sampling and analyzed cases 
covering a spectrum of lenses, regarding the phenomenon investigated 
( Eisenhardt and Graebner, 2007 ). Table 2 summarizes the 
Table 1 ( continued ) 
Concept/Author Research objective Key dimensions Research method Theoretical foundation 
Organizational setup for AI- 
based innovation 
management  
Füller et al. (2022) 
Impact of AI on innovation management and 
required organizational setup; innovation manager 
segmentation 
- Digital and AI skills of 
employees 
- Organizational 
structures 
- Innovation strategy 
Empirical Innovation 
management literature  
J. Kroh et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Technological Forecasting & Social Change 198 (2024) 122942
6
characteristics of the three cases and the 18 respondents. 
We conducted personal interviews lasting between 30 and 60 min 
each in 2019. We started with a set of open-ended questions to allow 
digital innovation capabilities to evolve naturally from conversations 
with the interviewees. We then organized our interview guidelines along 
the micro-foundations of digital innovation capability identified in the 
literature review (see Table 1). 
The interview guide is shown in Appendix 1. The interviews were 
transcribed and subjected to qualitative content analysis using MAXQDA 
2020 (VERBI Software, 2019). We developed a reference guideline 
comprising five main micro-foundations as categories (digital focus, 
digital mindset, digital innovation process, digital technology and data 
management, digital innovation network) and coded our data accordingly. 
The initial first-order analysis confirmed five main categories but, in 
addition, we inductively discovered a new category (overcoming digital 
innovation resistance) and added it to our reference guidelines. Next, we 
went through our data again and added subcategories to each category. 
Therefore, we ensured that the initial codes matched the reference 
Table 2 
Case characteristics of qualitative analysis.  
Company Industry Number of employees 
(FTE) 
Number of 
interviews 
Interviewees' functional backgrounds Interviewees' hierarchical levels 
A Marine industry  550  6 Product and Project Management, Business 
Development, HR 
Middle and top management 
B Medical technology 
industry  
1960  6 R&D, Quality Management, Operations, 
Controlling 
Middle management and 
employees 
C Mechanical engineering  1050  6 Product and Project Management, Sales, R&D Top, middle management, and 
employees  
Table 3 
Micro-foundations based on qualitative analysis.  
Micro- 
foundation 
Digital focus Digital innovation 
process 
Digital mindset Digital technology 
adoption and data 
management 
Digital innovation 
network 
Overcoming digital 
innovation resistance 
Description Describes the 
underlying strategy for 
digital innovation 
including a company's 
digital ambition, 
strategy formulation, 
and the availability of 
relevant resources 
Describes the flexible 
and interactive 
innovation process 
necessary for digital 
innovation including 
agile innovation 
methods 
Describes the shared 
understanding of digital 
innovations among 
employees facilitating 
awareness and proactive 
search for new digital 
opportunities 
Describes availability of 
technology, data 
management 
competences, and 
ability to translate 
outputs into business 
applications 
Describes the ability to 
collaborate with 
external partners for 
digital innovations (e. 
g., competitors, 
suppliers, customers 
and universities) 
Describes barriers to 
digital innovations 
including resistance 
from employees and 
lack of technology 
availability 
Facets Formulation of a digital 
innovation strategy and 
goals; Flexibility of 
innovation strategy; 
Resources for digital 
innovation; Roles and 
responsibilities 
Restructured 
innovation process; 
Agile and flexible 
innovation 
development methods; 
digital opportunity 
search 
Shared understanding of 
digital innovation; 
Employee initiatives; 
Digital natives 
Technological 
infrastructure; Data 
infrastructure; Data 
platforms; Ability to 
collect, process and 
interpret data; decision 
relevance of data 
Collaboration with 
suppliers, competitors, 
customers, research 
institutions; 
Collaboration in 
developing core 
competencies 
Employee resistance; 
Lack of skills; 
Technological barriers; 
Legal framework; 
Bureaucratic processes 
Proof quote 
(s) 
“We have a Vision 2025 
[…], where we define that 
this company will move 
strongly toward software- 
based products […] and 
our current hardware 
must be replaced step by 
step.” (Company A) 
“It is important, to have a 
clear strategy and […] 
basically, we need more 
speed in developing digital 
innovations. […]. When 
we recognize that we do 
not have the resources to 
develop digital 
innovations, […], we 
have to buy them. We 
have to take the risk to 
stay competitive in the 
future.” (Company C) 
“We can buy digital 
technologies to develop 
digital technologies, of 
course, but when we do 
not have a structured 
innovation process, we 
can't use it.” (Company 
C) 
“We naturally have to 
work with more agile, 
more interactive […], 
and even completely new 
methods. Digital 
innovations have 
different requirements 
[…], and we need to 
systematically change 
our innovation process” 
(Company B) 
“You need to lower 
barriers for idea 
generation in the 
company. We […] 
created a space […], 
where people can meet 
easily to be creative, to 
prototype, to try out.” 
(Company A) 
“Digital innovation […] 
has to get into people's 
heads and […] that is a 
challenge for every single 
employee. Changing a 
mindset is not easy.” 
(Company B) 
“The real challenge is to 
change the mindset in the 
company. We have to 
become more digital from 
within ourselves.” 
(Company A) 
“Uncertainty on digital 
innovations gives us a lot 
of new opportunities. […] 
Of course, we can do 
something wrong – by 
turning left or right too 
early or whatever. But we 
will definitely be on the 
right path and learn from 
our mistakes.” (Company 
C) 
“The data are the 
competitive advantage we 
have.” (Company B) 
“It is not enough to 
develop a platform […]. 
We have to operate them, 
we need to combine 
different data sources to 
propose value […] and to 
have a platform-driven 
business model.” 
(Company C) 
“There is high business 
potential in after-sales, 
because we have the data 
on how the customer uses 
our products. […] We will 
probably end up with 
leasing or renting out 
certain services based on 
software products.” 
(Company A) 
“We […] are working 
with other companies 
that have the core 
competences. We also 
work with universities 
and research institutes, 
[…] because we do not 
have the resources or 
skills.” (Company A) 
“We collect a lot of input 
from our customers and 
collaborate closely with 
them in the innovation 
development.” 
(Company B) 
“The nature of 
collaboration will change 
a lot; we have to pay 
much more attention to 
what competences 
suppliers or partners 
have. […] The speed of 
digital innovations is 
extremely high and we 
can only profit when the 
whole industry 
collaborates on artificial 
intelligence.” (Company 
C) 
“Employees who work in 
our company for 20 to 30 
years […] fear that they 
are not able to cope with 
digital innovations.” 
(Company B) 
“We still have 
communication problems 
between hardware and 
software developers. 
Hardware developers try 
to defend their empire 
[…] although software is 
getting more important 
than ever.” (Company A) 
“The legal framework is 
anti-innovative. Data 
protection and a lot of 
other laws and regulations 
hamper digital 
technologies' fast market 
entry.” (Company B) 
Total 
number 
of codes 
91 64 98 46 117 55  
J. Kroh et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Technological Forecasting & Social Change 198 (2024) 122942
7
categories and changed the codes slightly, where necessary. This facil -
itates a more fine-grained understanding of the micro-foundation of 
digital innovation capabilities. Table 3 summarizes the main categories, 
subcategories, and example quotes. Next, we developed items for each 
micro-foundation. 
3.1.2. Results 
We identified six micro-foundations of established companies' digital 
innovation capabilities of established companies (see Table 3 ). While 
the five identified micro-foundations validated our prior conceptuali -
zation, qualitative research resulted in one additional facet. 
First, digital focus is the company's ability to evaluate the strategic 
impact of digital innovation on its business model ( Foss and Saebi, 
2017 ). Our interviewees emphasized that their companies not only 
recognized the importance of digital innovation within their current 
business models but also explored it, along with business opportunities, 
outside their core industry. Further, they emphasized that a company 
needs to integrate digital innovation into its innovation goals and 
strategy, including financial, human resources, and strategic technology 
planning. This also requires defining clear roles and responsibilities for 
seizing digital opportunities. One interviewee stated: 
“ Our business model evolves continuously. We have a written digital 
innovation strategy, but we still struggle to implement it in our processes. 
However, we need to strategically align our processes to our future 
markets . ” 
Second, we learned from respondents that the digital innovation pro -
cess constantly considers experiments with digital innovation opportu -
nities. Consequently, the processes should focus on flexible and agile 
innovation development methods. Recent research also emphasizes that 
incumbent companies should balance flexibility and control in their 
innovation processes ( Svahn et al., 2017a ). The need for the rapid 
development and protection of digital innovations is driven by the 
awareness of higher competitive pressure; that is, new market actors 
might take advantage of emerging digital business opportunities. One 
employee emphasized the challenge of changing the innovation devel -
opment process in a company that rigidly formalized innovation 
processes. 
“ We had centralized structures and a traditional stage-gate based inno -
vation process. Therefore, we still use our traditional processes for digital 
innovation projects. Consequently, not all of our digital innovation pro -
jects are agile, although they should be. But we try to use agile methods 
when uncertainty increases . ” 
Third, the digital mindset emphasizes the necessity for a shared un -
derstanding of digital technologies and their potential for daily work 
and business. However, digital innovations increasingly contain 
advanced digital technologies, such as AI and big data analyses ( Ardo -
lino et al., 2016 ) that, on the one hand, demand new competencies from 
employees and, on the other hand, can weaken the long-term value of 
existing competencies ( Huang and Rust, 2018 ). The interviewees 
mentioned that the “ fear of missing something ” hampered the devel -
opment of digital innovation. The generativity and flexibility needed for 
digital innovation contrast with the rigidity of incumbent employees' 
routines, procedures, and beliefs ( K ¨onig et al., 2021 ). Thus, a change 
toward a digital mindset, wherein employees trust their competencies 
and feel empowered to develop digital innovations, is essential. One 
interviewee stated the following: 
“ We have cultural problems, because many employees think that a digital 
output is not a value proposition. Achieving a change in the mindset is not 
easy, and communicating our digital strategy is a first, but not the last, 
step on this journey . ” 
Fourth, the qualitative content analysis results supported the rele -
vance of digital technology adoption and data management . Physical re -
sources are an essential prerequisite for digital technology, and data 
management capability is a prerequisite for digital innovation. Com -
panies cannot develop digital innovation without the necessary tech -
nology and databases ( Yoo et al., 2012 ), therefore digital technology (i. 
e., infrastructure) and data management abilities (i.e., clear re -
sponsibility and coordination mechanisms for operational activities) are 
necessary to gather, analyze, and use data for innovation development. 
One interviewee highlighted the challenge of data management, despite 
a proper IT infrastructure: 
“ We renewed our IT system and have a large amount of data that is a good 
basis to find new business opportunities. However, we still struggle to 
analyze the data because of its complexity . ” 
Fifth, the results emphasize the importance of a digital innovation 
network, referring to companies' collaboration levels within and beyond 
their traditional supply chain and industry, a feature that must be 
enhanced. Developing digital innovation involves acting in a heteroge -
neous ecosystem ( Selander et al., 2010 ). Companies that want to suc -
ceed in the digital sphere must not only identify relevant partners, but 
also generate new contractual models for the flow of components, in -
formation, value, and product liability. One employee said the 
following. 
“ We miss knowledge on every digital technology. We, therefore, collab -
orate intensively with external partners and develop digital innovations 
together with them. I think we generate much greater business opportu -
nities when we collaborate beyond traditional customer and supplier 
relationships . ” 
Based on the qualitative results, we extended the set of micro- 
foundations by an additional sixth factor, which we called, ‘ overcoming 
digital innovation resistance . ’ We learned that the complexity of digital 
innovation raises resistance at different levels in a company's ecosystem. 
Constructive opposition is a source of innovative ideas ( Adomako et al., 
2019 ; Markham, 2000 ) that can increase innovation quality by broad -
ening the knowledge base for innovation development ( Hauschildt, 
2010 ; Juntunen et al., 2019 ). Collaborating with skeptical employees, 
customers, and suppliers also builds trust, and increases the acceptance 
and implementation of digital innovation. However, the success of 
digital innovation relies on overcoming resistance, which can take many 
forms, such as employees lacking the necessary knowledge or willing -
ness to develop digital innovations, job insecurity, legal barriers, inter -
nal bureaucracy, and fear of missing customer acceptance. This is in line 
with past research, which proposes that digital innovation faces 
numerous barriers, including lack of innovation culture, leadership buy- 
in, and technological skills, budget restrictions, legal boundaries, 
limited understanding of urgency, and a focus on daily business ( Gfrerer 
et al., 2021 ). These facets also mirror prior research that emphasized the 
relevance of knowledge of digital technologies and the willingness to 
engage in digital environments ( Nauhaus et al., 2021 ). One respondent 
summarized as follows: 
“ We see a lot of barriers in the development of digital innovations. [ … ] 
We have to work with employees who are afraid of losing their workplace. 
However, we have to cope with these barriers because we have to change 
our business model . ” 
Following an exploratory approach, we generated a set of 38 initial 
items for the six foundations of digital innovation capability. Thereby, 
the items drew on two sources: (i) the description of the micro- 
foundations resulting from the conceptual synthesis of the (mainly 
conceptual) literature, and (ii) the qualitative research. Therefore, the 
subcategories identified in the qualitative research and conceptual 
synthesis were used to formulate specific items. We ensured that the 
items capture the conceptual domain specified in the conceptual part as 
well as validated in the qualitative research. The items were furthermore 
pre-tested with three interviewees to ensure that they were uniformly 
and clearly understood, which resulted in only minor changes in 
wording. The final set of items is listed in Table 4 . 
J. Kroh et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Technological Forecasting & Social Change 198 (2024) 122942
8
3.2. Study 2: quantitative scale validation 
3.2.1. Procedure and samples 
The validity and reliability of the developed items and constructs 
were tested, using quantitative data from a cross-sectional industry 
sample of German and Chilean companies. To fit the purpose of our 
study, we collected data from companies that had been established for at 
least three years, excluded subsidiaries without R & D departments (e.g., 
sales offices), pure software companies, and companies with < 25 em -
ployees, since such organizations tend to lack formal organizational 
controls. We collected data from companies in various industries to test 
our measurement instrument between 2019 and 2022. The distribution 
among different industries from two geographical regions aimed to 
develop a measurement instrument that can be applied independent of 
the regional context, which requires assessment if the items and ratings 
do not systematically differ by region (e.g., due to differences regarding 
culture, infrastructure, economic development state, language, and 
interpretation) ( Steenkamp and Baumgartner, 1998 ). We used a five- 
point Likert scale (ranging from “ do not agree at all ” to “ completely 
agree ” ) for all developed items. We contacted senior managers and 
informed them of the purpose of the study in considering various aspects 
of innovation management, which additionally included new items on 
digital innovation capabilities. The companies nominated a set of em -
ployees, who regularly worked on innovation tasks, as study partici -
pants. Subsequently, they received an individual link to an online survey 
that included the items to be assessed. A total of 417 employees from 59 
product-centric companies participated in the study. Due to missing 
values in the core constructs, 23 cases were removed, resulting in 394 
cases for further analysis. 
We split the entire sample into three subsamples, because scale pu -
rification, structural validity, and convergent validity assessments 
should not be performed using the same dataset. The initial scale puri -
fication was performed using exploratory factor analysis (EFA), for 
which the literature recommends a minimum case-to-item ratio of 5:1 
( Hair et al., 2009 ). To meet this recommendation and given our 38 
items, we randomly assigned 193 cases from the German sample to the 
first subsample for scale purification. Structural validity is typically 
assessed using confirmatory factor analysis (CFA), for which a sample 
size of > 200 cases is recommended ( Boomsma and Hoogland, 2001 ). 
Therefore, we used the full German sample ( N = 271) to meet this 
requirement. For the final convergent validity assessment, we added 
data collected in Chile ( n = 123) to the final CFA, which was also used to 
assess structural invariance. The latter requires multi-group modeling, 
for which at least 100 cases per group are recommended ( Kline, 2005 ). 
We acknowledge that this subsampling approach with partial case 
overlaps represents a compromise to the ideal solution of performing 
each step with independent samples; however, given the amount of data 
we were able to collect, we believe that to meet the requirements of the 
applied statistical methods, this approach is justified in the context of 
scale development. Table 5 summarizes the characteristics of the 
subsamples. 
3.2.2. Scale purification 
EFA allows us to determine how well the observed items reflect the 
underlying psychological concepts of interest. Drawing on Subsample 1 
(n = 193), we performed a series of EFAs (principal components and 
varimax rotation). The initial EFA extracted eight factors with eigen -
values greater than one, accounting for 66.1 % of the observed variance. 
The initial item pool of 38 was reduced to 32 after eliminating 6 items 
with cross-loadings (cutoff point of 0.33) or low loadings (lower than 
0.50). Before interpreting the results, we assessed the data's suitability 
for structure detection with the Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin (KMO) measure of 
sampling adequacy and Bartlett's test of sphericity, which were both 
supported (KMO = 0.89; χ
2
(595) = 2603.10, p < .001). Furthermore, all 
communality scores of the items were clearly above 0.50, thereby, at 
satisfactory levels ( Child, 2006 ). The final solution resulted in seven 
factors with eigenvalues greater than one and an explained variance of 
66.9 %. All items loaded on the factor were originally designed for 
measurement. The only difference between the intended and empirical 
factor structures was with respect to the micro-foundation of digital 
technology and data management , for which two separate factors were 
extracted, i.e., digital technology capabilities and data management . All 
factors showed appropriate levels of reliability, as demonstrated by 
Cronbach's alpha scores ranging from 0.72 to 0.91 ( Nunnally and 
Table 4 
Constructs and initial items.  
Digital focus 
I1: We have recognized the importance of digital innovation for our company. 
I2: We have very ambitious digitization goals. 
I3: We have formulated and communicated a digital strategy as a guide to develop 
digital innovation. 
I4: We have defined roles, responsibilities and decision-making processes for the 
implementation of the digital strategy. 
I5: Management acts as a role model for digital innovation. 
I6: We provide extensive financial resources to implement our digital strategy. 
I7: We build new capabilities to implement our digital strategy. 
I8: We hire new employees to implement our digital strategy. 
I9: We refine our technical infrastructure to implement our digital strategy. 
I10: We modify our processes to implement our digital strategy. 
Digital innovation process 
I11: We consider the innovation possibilities of digital innovation resulting from the 
combination of hardware and software in our innovation process. 
I12: We consider the ongoing potential of digital innovations, for example, because 
of software updates, in our innovation process. 
I13: We consider new business opportunities beyond the primary intended use (e.g., 
extended data use) of digital innovations in our innovation process. 
I14: We are aware that external and unknown market partners may take business 
opportunities from our digital innovations. 
I15: We take precautions to protect our digital innovations against competitors. 
I16: We use agile methods and tools (e.g., SCRUM. digital mock-ups) to develop 
digital innovations. 
Digital mindset 
I17: In our company, digital innovation is established (e.g., information campaigns, 
events). 
I18: Our employees understand the possible impact of digital innovation on their 
daily work. 
I19: Our employees ask for the implementation of digital innovations. 
I20: Our employees discuss the impact of digital innovation on the company in 
teams. 
I21: A high number of our employees are digital natives. 
Digital innovation network 
I22: We are more dependent on external partners in the development of digital 
innovation than in the development of other kinds of innovation. 
I23: We collaborate with new external partners in the development of digital 
innovation. 
I24: Relationships with external partners have more of a partnership character than 
a customer-supplier-character. 
I25: There is no company in our digital innovation network (neither ourselves nor 
an external partner) that controls the innovation process. 
Digital technology and data management 
I26: We are able to identify valuable data (e.g., machine data, user data, etc.). 
I27: We are able to identify key digital technologies (e.g., cloud solutions, machine 
learning, etc.). 
I28: We have the appropriate technical systems to store, evaluate and analyze data 
that is valuable to us. 
I29: We are able to generate and merge data from different sources. 
I30: We are able to gain knowledge from this data. 
I31: We have clear responsibilities for all operational activities relating to data 
storage, evaluation and analysis. 
I32: We coordinate all operational activities relating to data storage, evaluation and 
analysis across functional and departmental boundaries. 
I33: We consider the impact of all operational decisions on data storage, evaluation 
and analysis. 
Overcoming digital innovation resistance 
I34: Our employees do not have the competences to develop digital innovations. 
I35: Our employees are not willing to develop digital innovations. 
I36: Our employees perceive legal conditions (e.g., data protection laws) as barriers 
to develop digital innovation. 
I37: Our employees think that missing customer and supplier acceptance is a barrier 
to develop digital innovation. 
I38: Our internal processes and high levels of bureaucracy are barriers to develop 
digital innovation.  
J. Kroh et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Technological Forecasting & Social Change 198 (2024) 122942
9
Bernstein, 1994 ). We also conducted another EFA at the construct level, 
which resulted in one factor with all capabilities, except digital innova -
tion network , which constituted a separate factor. Table 6 summarizes 
the EFA results. 
3.2.3. Structural validity assessment 
CFA enables us to assess whether an a priori defined theoretical 
factor structure is consistent with the empirical data. Therefore, we 
specified a correlation model with all latent variables and their corre -
sponding items and used the larger subsample 2 (n = 271) to perform 
maximum likelihood estimation (CFA). The multivariate normality test 
revealed no problematic items. The model fits the data well, as indicated 
by a χ
2
/d. f. ratio of 1.82, comparative fit index (CFI) of 0.91, incre -
mental fit index (IFI) of 0.91, and root mean square error of approxi -
mation (RMSEA) of 0.053, thereby falling within the recommended 
boundaries ( Hu and Bentler, 1998 ). The chi-square test was significant 
( χ
2 
= 804.32; df = 443; p < .001), but this was expected in model sit -
uations, when the sample size was above 250, with the number of 
observable variables exceeding 30, as in this study ( Hair et al., 2009 ). 
We further found that the average item loadings (standardized) for all 
constructs were > 0.63, that no individual item loading fell below 0.40, 
and all loadings were significant at the level of p < .001, thereby sup -
porting indicator reliability. The average variance extracted (AVE) was 
clearly above 0.50 for all but the reversely coded construct, i.e., over -
coming digital innovation resistance (AVE = 0.41). However, the data 
demonstrated discriminant validity because the square root of the AVE 
of each construct was larger than the highest correlation with all other 
latent variables ( Fornell and Larcker, 1981 ), which also applied to 
overcoming digital innovation resistance. Table 7 summarizes all the 
results (CFA Model A). 
To further assess whether an alternative factor structure might fit the 
data better, we estimated the fit of a set of model specifications that 
collapsed two or more factors into a single factor, and then compared the 
re-estimated model fit with the original model, using the chi-square 
difference test ( Anderson and Gerbing, 1988 ). The decision on the fac -
tors to be merged, was guided by their relationships so that the factors 
with the highest correlation were merged first. The procedure was 
continued until the final one-dimensional model. Table 8 summarizes 
the results; for all comparisons, the alternative models were significantly 
worse than the original model. We re-evaluated the internal consistency 
of the constructs in this larger sample, which was supported by Cron -
bach's alpha values ranging from 0.72 and 0.90. 
3.2.4. Convergent validity 
The relationship between the developed measure and another 
theoretically related construct must be examined to establish convergent 
Table 5 
Sample characteristics.   
Subsample 1 Subsample 2 Subsample 3  
Number  Number Δ S1  Number Δ S2 
Total number of informants  193  271 78  394 0 
Informants Germany  193  271 78  271 0 
Informants Chile  0  0 0  123 123 
Job areas (informants) Number Percentage Number Percentage Δ S1 Number Percentage Δ S2 
Leadership/Strategy 15 7.8 % 18 6.6 % 3 42 10.7 % 24 
Marketing/Sales/Service/Consulting 49 25.4 % 74 27.3 % 25 97 24.6 % 23 
R & D/Innovation management 23 11.9 % 37 13.7 % 14 59 15.0 % 22 
Production/maintenance 25 13.0 % 33 12.2 % 8 47 11.9 % 14 
Product/Project management 26 13.5 % 35 12.9 % 9 51 12.9 % 16 
Controlling/Logistics/Process management 11 5.7 % 17 6.3 % 6 23 5.8 % 6 
Purchasing 2 1.0 % 4 1.5 % 2 8 2.0 % 4 
IT 13 6.7 % 15 5.5 % 2 16 4.1 % 1 
Others 29 15.0 % 38 14.0 % 9 51 12.9 % 13 
Hierarchical position (informants) Number Percentage Number Percentage Δ S1 Number Percentage Δ S2 
Upper management 18 9.3 % 20 7.4 % 2 58 14.7 % 38 
Middle management 32 16.6 % 35 12.9 % 3 75 19.0 % 40 
Lower management/team leader 56 29.0 % 79 29.2 % 23 98 24.9 % 19 
Employee 87 45.1 % 137 50.6 % 50 163 41.4 % 26 
Industry Number Percentage Number Percentage Δ S1 Number Percentage Δ S2 
Manufacturing goods (chemicals, food, plastics, glass, etc.) 7 19.4 % 7 18.4 % 0 8 13.6 % 1 
Industrial engineering (machine construction, plant engineering, etc.) 3 8.3 % 3 7.9 % 0 10 16.9 % 7 
Utilities (energy, water, recycling) 11 30.6 % 12 31.6 % 1 14 23.7 % 2 
Others 15 41.7 % 16 42.1 % 1 27 45.8 % 11 
Company size (revenue; Mio. EUR) Number Percentage Number Percentage Δ S1 Number Percentage Δ S2 
Less than 50 Mio. 12 33.3 % 12 31.6 % 0 24 40.7 % 12 
51 – 250 11 30.6 % 12 31.6 % 1 14 23.7 % 2 
251 – 500 1 2.8 % 1 2.6 % 0 1 1.7 % 0 
More than 500 Mio. 9 25.0 % 9 23.7 % 0 12 20.3 % 3 
n.a. 3 8.3 % 4 11.1 % 1 8 13.6 % 4 
Company size (FTE) Number Percentage Number Percentage Δ S1 Number Percentage Δ S2 
Less than 100 FTE 6 16.7 % 8 21.1 % 2 22 37.3 % 14 
101 – 250 9 25.0 % 9 23.7 % 0 11 18.6 % 2 
251 – 500 7 19.4 % 7 18.4 % 0 8 13.6 % 1 
More than 500 FTE 14 38.9 % 14 36.8 % 0 17 28.8 % 3 
n.a. 0 0.0 % 0 0.0 % 0 1 1.7 % 1 
Total number of companies  36  38 2  59 21 
No. informants Number Percentage Number Percentage  Number Percentage  
1 informant 6 16.67 % 2 5.26 %  3 5.08 %  
2 – 3 4 11.1 % 3 7.9 %  10 16.9 %  
4 – 5 15 41.7 % 16 42.1 %  23 39.0 %  
6 – 7 4 11.1 % 7 18.4 %  9 15.3 %  
8 – 9 3 8.3 % 2 5.3 %  2 3.4 %  
More than 10 informants 4 11.1 % 8 21.1 %  12 20.3 %  
Average no. of informants by company  5.36  7.13   6.68   
J. Kroh et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Technological Forecasting & Social Change 198 (2024) 122942
10
validity. Evidence of such a relationship (e.g., a significant correlation) 
supports the idea that the new measurement concept identifies mean -
ingful differences. Therefore, researchers are encouraged to include 
other measures when collecting data for scale validation, that can then 
be used to assess convergent validity ( Hinkin, 1998 ). We implemented 
this approach by including a measure of digital innovation success in the 
questionnaire. We assumed that digital innovation capability and its 
underlying micro-foundations result in higher innovation success. Thus, 
we calculated the correlation between digital innovation capability and 
digital innovation success. Using established scales from past research to 
measure the economic success of innovation activities ( Griffin and Page, 
1993 ; Manion and Cherion, 2009 ), we changed the measure slightly to 
match digital innovation. In particular, the survey items asked about the 
current contributions of digital innovations in increasing revenue, 
profitability, market share, market creation, image, customer satisfac -
tion, improved product/service quality, and process efficiency 
(Cronbach's alpha: 0.95). 
In this step, we drew on subsample 3 ( n = 394), which includes the 
full dataset collected in Germany and Chile. Before calculating the 
correlations, we conducted the original CFA to assess the measurement 
model. Table 7 summarizes the results (CFA Model B). With a larger 
sample size, the global fit of the model improved ( χ
2 
= 932.48; df = 443; 
χ
2
/d. f. = 2.11; p < .001; CFI = 0.93; IFI = 0.93; RMSEA = 0.052). At the 
indicator level, all factor loadings are significant ( > 0.50 and significant. 
At the latent variable level, the AVE of all variables was > 0.50, except 
for overcoming digital innovation resistance, but its AVE also increased 
to 0.46 in the larger dataset. Each square root of the AVE demonstrated 
discriminant validity being greater than the highest correlation with all 
other variables ( Fornell and Larcker, 1981 ). 
In addition to the scores for the seven constructs, we calculated the 
overall digital innovation capability score for the correlation analysis. 
To overcome digital innovation resistance, which is reverse-coded, we 
Table 6 
Results of exploratory factor analysis.   
Factor loadings 2nd-order 
loading 
Construct/item DIF DIP DMI DIN DTC DMA DIR 
Digital focus (DIF) ( α = 0.91; Eigenvalue = 4.86; Variance Explained = 15.19 % )         0.64 
I1
a 
( ¡ ) (   ) (   ) (   ) (   ) (   ) (   )  
I2
a 
( ¡ ) (   ) (   ) (   ) (   ) (   ) (   )  
I3 0.63 0.26 0.20 0.08 0.05 0.21 0.03  
I4 0.64 0.19 0.26 0.12   0.06 0.33 0.07  
I5 0.57 0.26 0.14 0.06 0.17 0.22 0.27  
I6 0.68 0.08 0.09 0.08 0.33 0.15 0.10  
I7 0.79 0.21 0.11 0.10 0.06 0.10 0.25  
I8 0.67 0.12 0.13 0.13 0.14 0.03 0.23  
I9 0.75 0.18 0.03 0.19 0.24 0.00 0.05  
I10 0.75 0.16 0.11 0.09 0.19 0.09 0.00  
Digital innovation process (DIP) ( α = 0.86; Eigenvalue = 2.72; Variance Explained = 8.49 
% )         
0.58 
I11 0.33 0.62 0.20 0.09 0.34   0.01 0.07  
I12 0.31 0.72 0.13 0.15 0.25   0.01 0.17  
I13 0.32 0.74 0.09 0.12 0.27 0.05 0.09  
I14 0.27 0.69 0.09 0.02 0.07 0.17   0.14  
I15
a 
(   ) ( ¡ ) (   ) (   ) (   ) (   ) (   )  
I16
a 
(   ) ( ¡ ) (   ) (   ) (   ) (   ) (   )  
Digital mindset (DMI) ( α = 0.82; Eigenvalue = 2.69; Variance Explained = 8.39 % )         0.80 
I17 0.08 0.30 0.59 0.12 0.13 0.16 0.31  
I18 0.30 0.13 0.70   0.02 0.22 0.04 0.29  
I19 0.16 0.06 0.78   0.06 0.31 0.05 0.06  
I20 0.17 0.06 0.79 0.07 0.09 0.15 0.02  
I21
a 
(   ) (   ) ( ¡ ) (   ) (   ) (   ) (   )  
Digital innovation network (DIN) ( α = 0.81; Eigenvalue = 2.50; Variance Explained = 7.82 
% )         
  0.05 
I22   0.11   0.02 0.00 0.79   0.04   0.01   0.23  
I23 0.29 0.04   0.07 0.75 0.15 0.03 0.00  
I24 0.23 0.10 0.08 0.79 0.12 0.09 0.06  
I25 0.16 0.14 0.05 0.70 0.01 0.07 0.08  
Digital technology capability (DTC) ( α = 0.88; Eigenvalue = 3.57; Variance Explained =
11.17 % )         
0.76 
I26 0.17 0.06 0.14 0.12 0.69 0.04 0.12  
I27 0.22 0.31 0.25 0.09 0.60 0.07 0.21  
I28 0.18 0.15 0.12 0.01 0.74 0.28 0.15  
I29 0.11 0.17 0.16 0.03 0.81 0.20 0.14  
I30 0.17 0.20 0.12 0.05 0.72 0.28 0.11  
Data management (DMA) ( α = 0.89; Eigenvalue = 2.65; Variance Explained = 8.29 % )         0.58 
I31 0.17 0.03 0.02 0.06 0.22 0.87 0.11  
I32 0.20 0.05 0.07 0.11 0.24 0.83 0.04  
I33 0.19 0.10 0.25 0.00 0.20 0.76 0.05  
Overcoming digital innovation resistance (DIR) ( α = 0.72; Eigenvalue = 2.40; Variance 
Explained = 7.50 % )         
  0.78 
I34   0.14   0.14   0.25 0.07   0.28   0.20 ¡ 0.60  
I35   0.02   0.26   0.28 0.03   0.01   0.12 ¡ 0.66  
I36   0.16 0.21   0.04 0.08   0.18 0.14 ¡ 0.69  
I37
a 
(   ) (   ) (   ) (   ) (   ) (   ) ( ¡ )  
I38   0.27 0.00 0.00   0.06   0.19   0.12 ¡ 0.70  
n = 193. 
Bold shows the factor loadings of the items on the construct that they are built of, while the not-bold shows the factor loadings on the other constructs. 
a
Eliminated during scale purification due to low loading or cross-loadings; α , Cronbach's alpha. 
J. Kroh et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Technological Forecasting & Social Change 198 (2024) 122942
11
used the inverted construct score to calculate the overall digital inno -
vation capability score. Table 9 summarizes the results of the subsequent 
bivariate correlation analysis (Pearson). Following Cohen's judgement 
that correlations should be interpreted as small, moderate, and large 
when the correlation coefficients are > 0.10, 0.30, and 0.50 ( Cohen, 
1992 ), assessing the relationship between the overall concept of digital 
innovation capability and digital innovation performance provides 
support for convergent validity, with r = 0.51 ( p < .001). At the level of 
the seven micro-foundations, correlations can also be considered mod -
erate to strong, except for the dimension of digital innovation network , 
which does not correlate with performance. However, the dimension 
was significantly correlated with the other dimensions of the overall 
concept, suggesting that digital innovation networks relate to the 
concept of digital innovation capability. Hence, the relevance of having 
external digitalization partners for achieving performance is a more 
complex relationship. Taken together, these results support the 
convergent validity of the new scale. 
3.2.5. Measurement invariance and within-group consensus assessment 
Subsample 3 ( n = 394) includes cases from two countries, allowing 
us to assess the psychometric equivalence of the digital innovation 
capability scale across countries. Following the common approach to 
assess measurement invariance ( Putnick and Bornstein, 2016 ), we 
applied multi-group CFA with various levels of model constraints, across 
the two countries. Table 10 summarizes the results. The first model 
tested configural invariance; that is, the items exhibited the same 
pattern of salient and non-salient loadings across countries. We esti -
mated a nested model using two groups without constraints. Configural 
invariance was supported by a good model fit ( χ
2 
= 1615.85, df = 886, 
χ
2
/d. f. = 1.82; p < .001; CFI = 0.90; RMSEA = 0.045), with all loadings 
significant at > 0.40. Next, we assessed metric invariance – the equiva -
lence of item loadings on the factors – by constraining the loadings to be 
equal across groups and comparing the model fit with the configural 
invariance model ( Chen, 2007 ). The overall model fit was not signifi -
cantly worse ( Δ χ
2 
= 35.74; Δ df = 25; p = .08; Δ CFI = 0.00; Δ RMSEA =
  0.001), which supports full metric invariance. To assess scalar 
invariance, that is, whether the mean differences in the latent constructs 
captured all mean differences in the items' shared variance, we con -
strained item intercepts to be equal across the two groups, and the 
overall model fit was then compared with the metric invariance model. 
Table 7 
Results of confirmatory factor analyses.
a   
CFA Model A CFA Model B 
Construct/item Loading  AVE α Loading  AVE α 
Digital focus   0.54  0.90   0.59  0.92 
I3  0.68 ***    0.68 ***   
I4  0.71 ***    0.75 ***   
I5  0.69 ***    0.77 ***   
I6  0.75 ***    0.79 ***   
I7  0.82 ***    0.85 ***   
I8  0.68 ***    0.71 ***   
I9  0.78 ***    0.80 ***   
I10  0.74 ***    0.77 ***   
Digital innovation process   0.63  0.86   0.70  0.91 
I11  0.82 ***    0.86 ***   
I12  0.87 ***    0.90 ***   
I13  0.83 ***    0.86 ***   
I14  0.61 ***    0.71 ***   
Digital mindset   0.57  0.84   0.64  0.87 
I17  0.70 ***    0.75 ***   
I18  0.85 ***    0.85 ***   
I19  0.76 ***    0.82 ***   
I20  0.70 ***    0.78 ***   
Digital innovation network   0.50  0.81   0.57  0.85 
I22  0.56 ***    0.66 ***   
I23  0.78 ***    0.85 ***   
I24  0.82 ***    0.83 ***   
I25  0.62 ***    0.68 ***   
Digital technology capability   0.58  0.87   0.62  0.89 
I26  0.64 ***    0.70 ***   
I27  0.72 ***    0.69 ***   
I28  0.82 ***    0.80 ***   
I29  0.82 ***    0.87 ***   
I30  0.78 ***    0.85 ***   
Data management   0.73  0.89   0.73  0.91 
I31  0.87 ***    0.89 ***   
I32  0.91 ***    0.92 ***   
I33  0.77 ***    0.81 ***   
Overcoming digital innovation resistance   0.41  0.72   0.46  0.77 
I34  0.79 ***    0.76 ***   
I35  0.65 ***    0.68 ***   
I36  0.47 ***    0.58 ***   
I38  0.61 ***    0.68 ***   
χ
2 
(df)  804.32  (443)   932.48  (443)  
χ
2
/df  1.82 ***    2.11 ***   
CFI  0.91     0.93    
IFI  0.91     0.93    
RMSEA  0.053     0.052    
n  271     394     
a
AVE, average variance extracted. α , Cronbach's alpha. 
***
p < .001 (two-tailed). 
J. Kroh et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Technological Forecasting & Social Change 198 (2024) 122942
12
The significant chi-square difference test ( Δ χ
2 
= 165.78; Δ df = 32; p <
.001) indicated a worse model fit, but the higher sensitivity of the chi- 
square difference test in larger samples needs to be considered. The 
changes in the other fit indices presented mixed results (CFI = 0.02; 
RMSEA = 0.003). This indicates that means across countries should be 
compared with caution because of the potential additive bias ( Meredith, 
1993 ). 
Thus far, we have analyzed the validity of our measurement instru -
ment to capture respondents' individual perceptions in their assessment 
of their organization's digital innovation capability. However, this 
measure is intended to support organization-level research. Therefore, a 
reliable measurement instrument must demonstrate its ability to 
Table 8 
Results of confirmatory factor analysis – Model fit of dimension variations.   
Model fit 
Model χ
2 
df χ
2
/df IFI CFI RMSEA Δ χ
2  
Δ df 
7 dimensions (original)  804.32  443  1.816  0.91  0.91  0.053    
6 dimensions (merged DIF + DIP)  1018.17  449  2.268  0.86  0.85  0.066  213.84 ***  6 
6 dimensions (merged DTC + DMI)  1088.49  449  2.424  0.84  0.84  0.070  284.17 ***  6 
6 dimensions (merged DMA + DTC)  1060.45  449  2.362  0.85  0.84  0.068  256.13 ***  6 
6 dimensions (merged DIR + DMI)  906.85  449  2.020  0.88  0.88  0.059  102.53 ***  6 
5 dimensions (merged DIF + DIP + DMI)  1306.53  454  2.878  0.79  0.78  0.080  502.21 ***  11 
5 dimensions (merged DTC + DMI + DIP)  1287.81  454  2.837  0.79  0.79  0.079  483.49 ***  11 
5 dimensions (merged DMA + DTC + DIP)  1297.35  454  2.858  0.79  0.78  0.080  493.03 ***  11 
5 dimensions (merged DIR + DMI + DIR)  1198.23  454  2.639  0.81  0.81  0.075  393.91 ***  11 
4 dimensions (merged DIF + DIP + DMI + DMA)  1643.75  458  3.589  0.70  0.70  0.094  839.43 ***  15 
4 dimensions (merged DTC + DMI + DIP + DIF)  1608.11  458  3.511  0.71  0.70  0.093  803.79 ***  15 
4 dimensions (merged DMA + DTC + DIP + DIR)  1449.43  458  3.165  0.75  0.75  0.086  645.11 ***  15 
4 dimensions (merged DIR + DMI + DIR + DIF)  1560.85  458  3.408  0.72  0.72  0.091  756.53 ***  15 
2 dimensions (merged DIF + DIP + DMI + DMA + DTC + DIN)  2081.07  463  4.495  0.59  0.58  0.109  1276.75 ***  20 
2 dimensions (merged DIF + DIP + DMI + DMA + DTC + DIR)  2003.39  463  4.327  0.61  0.60  0.107  1199.07 ***  20 
1 dimension (merged DIF + DIP + DMI + DNI + DTC + DMA + DIR)  2186.44  464  4.712  0.56  0.56  0.113  1382.12 ***  21 
DIF, Digital Focus; DIP, Digital Innovation Process; DMI, Digital Mindset; DNI, DIN, Digital Innovation Network; DTC, Digital Technology Capability; DMA, Data 
Management; DIR Overcoming Digital Innovation Resistance. CFI, comparative fit index; IFI, incremental fit index; RMSEA, root-mean-square error of approximation. 
n = 193. 
***
p < .001 (two-tailed). 
Table 9 
Mean, standard deviations, and correlation matrix.
a   
Mean SD 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. ICC 
(1, k ) 
1. Country dummy (0 =
GER))  
0.30  0.46 ( – )          ( – ) 
2. Digital focus  3.00  0.97   0.14 ** (0.92)         0.68 
3. Digital innovation 
process  
3.02  1.00   0.15 ** 0.65 *** (0.91)        0.58 
4. Digital mindset  2.80  0.95   0.07 0.53 *** 0.56 *** (0.87)       0.71 
5. Digital technology 
capability  
3.34  0.92 0.14 ** 0.41 *** 0.50 *** 0.42 *** (0.89)      0.71 
6. Data management  2.86  1.07 0.05 0.41 *** 0.39 *** 0.36 *** 0.61 *** (0.91)     0.55 
7. Overcoming digital 
innovation resistance  
2.86  0.91   0.33 ***   0.12 *   0.02   0.22 ***   0.30 ***   0.16 ** (0.77)    0.72 
8. Digital Innovation 
Network  
3.27  0.92   0.31 *** 0.44 *** 0.42 *** 0.28 *** 0.12 * 0.08 0.22 *** (0.85)   0.57 
9. Digital innovation 
capability  
3.06  0.64   0.02 0.78 *** 0.78 *** 0.74 *** 0.75 *** 0.68 ***   0.38 *** 0.47 *** ( – )  0.59 
10. Digital innovation 
success  
3.10  1.00 0.27 *** 0.40 *** 0.42 *** 0.49 *** 0.43 *** 0.34 ***   0.17 ** 0.06 0.51 *** (0.95) 0.62 
n = 394. 
a
S.D., standard deviation. Cronbach's alpha reported along the diagonal. ICC(1,k) intra-class correlation coefficient. 
*
p < .05. 
**
p < .01. 
***
p < .001 (two-tailed). 
Table 10 
Results of measurement invariance tests.   
Model fit   
Model χ
2 
df χ
2
/df CFI RMSEA Δ χ
2  
Δ df Δ CFI Δ RMSEA 
Configural invariance  1615.84  886  1.824  0.90  0.045      
Metric invariance  1651.57  911  1.813  0.90  0.044  35.74   25  0.00    0.001 
Scalar invariance  1817.36  943  1.927  0.88  0.047  165.78 ***  32    0.02  0.003 
n = 394 (Germany: n = 271; Chile: n = 123). 
***
p < .001 (two-tailed). 
J. Kroh et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Technological Forecasting & Social Change 198 (2024) 122942
13
produce a similar assessment of an organization, independent of the 
employee providing the rating. Employees' ratings within a company 
might vary slightly because of differences in their exposure to organi -
zational practices and activities, depending on their function or hierar -
chical position. Nevertheless, a reliable measure of a company's digital 
innovation capability must demonstrate appropriate within-group 
consensus. Our multi-respondent sample was suitable for this investi -
gation. In particular, we drew on Subsample 3 ( n = 394, organizational 
level: n = 59) to calculate the intra-class correlation coefficients (ICC 1, 
k), which indicate inter-rater reliability and agreement ( LeBreton and 
Senter, 2008 ; Shrout and Fleiss, 1979 ). We report the ICC (1,k) for each 
subdimension and the overall score for digital innovation capability in 
Table 9 . The ICC (1,k) values ranged between 0.55 and 0.71, confirming 
levels of agreement that can be interpreted as good to excellent ( Fleiss, 
1986 ). This supports the idea that the items allow for a reliable appli -
cation of the scale to assess the organizational characteristics of digital 
innovation capability based on individual employees' perceptions. 
4. Discussion 
When seeking digital innovation, companies must mobilize and 
deploy capabilities suitable for a specific task ( Svahn et al., 2017b ). 
However, digital innovation also requires them to constantly reconfig -
ure their resources, processes, and structures, to take advantage of new 
opportunities, and sustain a competitive advantage in the dynamic 
environment of emerging digital technologies. This study conceptualizes 
and empirically validates a multi-dimensional measure to capture the 
digital innovation capability necessary for established product-centric 
companies to successfully shape their business into the digital space. 
Therefore, we draw on the dynamic capability view ( Teece, 2007 ), and 
prior literature on organizational factors fostering digital innovation, to 
identify the relevant micro-foundations necessary for established com -
panies to sense, seize, and reconfigure digital innovation. 
The results reveal seven micro-foundations of digital innovation 
capability, i.e., digital focus, digital innovation process, digital mindset, 
digital innovation network, digital technology capability, data man -
agement, and overcoming digital innovation resistance. Based on a 
multi-stage empirical design consisting of literature review, qualitative 
analysis and quantitative validation, we develop and validate a mea -
surement instrument to determine the status quo of organizational ca -
pabilities for digital innovation. The results suggest that the 
measurement instrument covers the relevant dimensions of digital 
innovation capabilities and is applicable across different industries, 
employee groups, and countries. Consequently, a valid measurement 
instrument is available that allows practitioners and researchers to 
determine the digital innovation capabilities of firms. The strength of 
our measurement instrument lies in its ability to map the multidimen -
sionality of digital innovation capabilities. Nevertheless, it is possible to 
use individual constructs separately. 
4.1. Theoretical implications 
By analyzing the challenges of established product-centric com -
panies, and the capability necessary to enter and grow through digital 
innovation, we respond to the call for research on how organizations 
with no experience in using digital technologies should organize for 
digital innovation ( Kohli and Melville, 2018 ; Menz et al., 2021 ; D ą b -
rowska et al., 2022 ; Williams et al., 2022 ). We contribute to the litera -
ture by introducing a dynamic capability view of digital innovation, as 
this theoretical foundation addresses the need for transformation and 
reconfiguration required by companies to engage in digital innovation. 
By synthesizing prior (mainly conceptual) research on organizational- 
level antecedents of digital innovation and transformation through the 
lens of the dynamic capability view, we conceptualize a set of micro- 
foundations, addressing the specific nature and challenges of digital 
innovation ( Yoo et al., 2012 ), that should enable established companies 
to succeed in digital innovation. As such, our conceptualization com -
plements prior research focused on isolated aspects, such as digital 
innovation management ( Füller et al., 2022 ; Nambisan et al., 2017 ), 
strategy ( Kindermann et al., 2020 ), or competing concerns inhibiting 
digital innovations ( Svahn et al., 2017a ). Our approach is also distinct 
from past frameworks, suggesting sets of resources and capabilities to 
master digitalization and digital innovation (e.g., Gfrerer et al., 2021 ; 
Annarelli et al., 2021 ; D ą browska et al., 2022 ). In addition to focusing on 
the organizational factors that enable established companies to recon -
figure for digital innovation, we develop a measurement instrument that 
is empirically tested through qualitative and quantitative research. This 
study provides a reliable and valid scale to support future research on 
the antecedents of digital innovation success in the context of estab -
lished product-centric companies. 
4.2. Managerial implications 
Based on prior literature, we developed a multi-dimensional mea -
surement instrument to capture digital innovation capability and vali -
dated it through qualitative and quantitative research. The items are 
easy to understand, the survey could be completed expeditiously, and 
the analysis in the form of aggregate scores is simple. This measurement 
concept offers companies and their managers the opportunity to reflect 
on their digital innovation capabilities. When including employees in 
different functional departments, entities, or hierarchical levels, detec -
ted differences in their evaluations can trigger discussions if subgroups 
only differ in their perceptions or require specific capacity-building 
measures. A consensus on underperformance with respect to certain 
micro-foundations can help managers prioritize digital innovation- 
related interventions at the organizational level; this includes the 
formulation of a digital innovation strategy when scoring low in this 
area. The measurement instrument may also allow for a comparison 
between companies or a benchmarking, which helps identify best 
practices, and track changes, in digital innovation capability over time. 
These insights may also help policy makers evaluate the status quo of the 
industries' digital innovation capabilities. Consequently, policy makers 
could develop specific education and funding programs to further guide 
the digital transformation and the building of digital innovation 
capabilities. 
4.3. Limitations and future research 
We used a mixed-method approach to develop and validate our 
digital innovation capability measures. Thereby, analyzing the rela -
tionship between digital innovation capability and company success 
might be important to underline the relevance of the digital innovation 
capability. For example, future research should investigate the influence 
of digital innovation capability on digital innovation success and 
company-level outcomes, such as innovation program performance. 
Although we already included an analysis that correlates the micro- 
foundations with digital innovation success (see Table 9 ), regression 
models using different performance evaluation datasets should be 
applied. In this context, future research could also apply designs where 
dependent and independent variables come from different informants, 
thereby avoiding common method bias concerns ( Globocnik et al., 2022 ; 
Kroh et al., 2018 ). 
Further, the performance relevance of digital innovation capabilities 
may depend on company-level contingency factors. For instance, future 
research might investigate whether the relevance of certain micro- 
foundations might differ for companies in high-vs. low-tech industries, 
high vs. low degrees of servitization, high vs. low risk aversion cultures, 
or by type of digital technology (AI, IoT, mobile, etc.). This would allow 
us to learn more about the relative importance of certain micro- 
foundations in different organizational contexts. 
The quantitative study supports the validity of the measurement 
instrument across regions by collecting data from Germany and Chile. 
J. Kroh et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Technological Forecasting & Social Change 198 (2024) 122942
14
These two countries differ in terms of culture, industry structure, and 
digital innovation experience. Despite the generally high influence of 
the national context on response patterns in surveys ( de Jong et al., 
2008 ), we demonstrate the suitability of the measurement instrument 
for capturing the micro-foundations of digital innovation capabilities in 
different countries. This is remarkable, given that the questionnaires 
were completed in the respective local languages. However, our evalu -
ations also showed limited scalar invariance; that is, the intercepts 
varied systematically by region. Future research that presents group- 
mean comparisons across countries should evaluate this bias. In the 
case of invariance violations, several remedial strategies enable mean -
ingful mean comparisons. For instance, intercept restrictions can be 
relaxed, and if less than half of the scale items are not invariant, past 
research has shown that the latent mean comparison results are still 
valid ( Steinmetz, 2013 ). In large-scale studies with many subgroups, 
correction approaches, such as alignment-within-CFA ( Marsh et al., 
2018 ), can be applied. 
Finally, our research designs were applied at only one point in time 
for each company. However, building digitalization capabilities is a 
long-term process ( Büschgens et al., 2013 ). Future longitudinal studies 
must further investigate the extent to which the measurement reflects 
changes in digital innovation capability over time. The evidence pre -
sented in validating the scales and high inter-rater reliability is opti -
mistic; however, it is possible that the effect of fundamental company 
characteristics on the response pattern are so strong that changes in 
digital innovation capability are limited in their visibility. 
CRediT authorship contribution statement 
Julia Kroh: Investigation, Methodology, Formal analysis, Writing – 
original draft. Dietfried Globocnik: Methodology, Formal analysis, 
Writing – review & editing. Carsten Schultz: Conceptualization, 
Writing – review & editing, Supervision. Frederike Holdhof: Concep -
tualization, Investigation. S ø ren Salomo: Conceptualization, Writing – 
review & editing, Supervision. 
Declaration of competing interest 
During the preparation of the work “ MICRO-FOUNDATIONS OF 
DIGITAL INNOVATION CAPABILITY – A MIXED METHOD APPROACH 
TO DEVELOP AND VALIDATE A MULTI-DIMENSIONAL MEASURE -
MENT INSTRUMENT ” the authors Julia Kroh, Dietfried Globocnik, 
Carsten Schultz, Frederike Holdhof, and S ø ren Salomo did not use any AI 
and AI-assisted tools or services. 
Data availability 
Data will be made available on request. 
Acknowledgements 
The authors would like to thank the helpful and constructive input 
gained from the IPDM Conference 2021 and the JPIM Research Forum 
2022, where previous versions of this paper were presented. 
Appendix 1. Interview guideline 
Part (A) Digital innovation in theory  
• What is your understanding of digital innovations? Please define 
digital innovation.  
• Based on the definition of digital innovations, what might be the 
most important requirements for digital innovation development? 
Part (B) Digital innovation management 
How do you develop digital innovations? Please describe the digital 
innovation process from ideation to digital product's / service's market 
introduction and give examples. 
How does digital innovation development differ from non-digital 
innovation management? 
Please specify with regard to … 
… data availability and management. 
… competences and mindset. 
… strategy and process design. 
… collaboration intensity with internal and external stakeholders. 
What did you change in your innovation process to considerate 
digital innovations' requirements? 
Part (C) Digital business model 
How important are digital innovations for your firm? 
How do digital innovations influence your current and future busi -
ness model? 
Which value do you generate from digital innovations today? 
References 
Abrell, T., Pihlajamaa, M., Kanto, L., Vom Brocke, J., Uebernickel, F., 2016. The role of 
users and customers in digital innovation: insights from B2B manufacturing firms. 
Inf. Manage. 53, 324 – 335. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.im.2015.12.005 . 
Adomako, S., Amankwah-Amoah, J., Danso, A., 2019. The effects of stakeholder 
integration on firm – level product innovativeness: insights from small and 
medium – sized enterprises in Ghana. RD Manag. 49, 734 – 747. https://doi.org/ 
10.1111/radm.12367 . 
Anderson, J.C., Gerbing, D.W., 1988. Structural equation modeling in practice: a review 
and recommended two-step approach. Psychol. Bull. 103, 411 – 423 . 
Annarelli, A., Battistella, C., Nonino, F., Parida, V., Pessot, E., 2021. Literature review on 
digitalization capabilities: co-citation analysis of antecedents, conceptualization and 
consequences. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Change 166, 120635. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.techfore.2021.120635 . 
Appio, F.P., Frattini, F., Petruzzelli, A.M., Neirotti, P., 2021. Digital transformation and 
innovation management: a synthesis of existing research and an agenda for future 
studies. J. Prod. Innov. Manag. 38, 4 – 20. https://doi.org/10.1111/jpim.12562 . 
Ardolino, M., Saccani, N., Gaiardelli, P., Rapaccini, M., 2016. Exploring the key enabling 
role of digital technologies for PSS offerings. Procedia CIRP 47, 561 – 566. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2016.03.238 . 
Autio, E., Nambisan, S., Thomas, L.D.W., Wright, M., 2018. Digital affordances, spatial 
affordances, and the genesis of entrepreneurial ecosystems. Strateg. Entrep. J. 12, 
72 – 95. https://doi.org/10.1002/sej.1266 . 
Benkler, Y., 2008. The Wealth of Networks: How Social Production Transforms Markets 
and Freedom. Yale University, New Haven and London. https://doi.org/10.1177/ 
1084713807301373 .  
Bj ¨orkdahl, J., 2020. Strategies for digitalization in manufacturing firms. Calif. Manage. 
Rev. 62, 17 – 36. https://doi.org/10.1177/0008125620920349 . 
Boomsma, A., Hoogland, J.J., 2001. The robustness of LISREL modeling revisited. Struct. 
Equ. Models Present Future Festschr. Honor Karl J ¨oreskog 2, 139 – 168 . 
Büschgens, T., Bausch, A., Balkin, D.B., 2013. Organizational culture and innovation: a 
meta-analytic review: organizational culture and innovation. J. Prod. Innov. Manag. 
30, 763 – 781. https://doi.org/10.1111/jpim.12021 . 
Cappa, F., Franco, S., Rosso, F., 2022. Citizens and cities: leveraging citizen science and 
big data for sustainable urban development. Bus. Strategy Environ. 31, 648 – 667. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/bse.2942 . 
Ceipek, R., Hautz, J., de Massis, A., Matzler, K., Ardito, L., 2021. Digital transformation 
through exploratory and exploitative internet of things innovations: the impact of 
family management and technological diversification*. J. Prod. Innov. Manag. 38, 
142 – 165. https://doi.org/10.1111/jpim.12551 . 
Chen, F.F., 2007. Sensitivity of goodness of fit indexes to lack of measurement 
invariance. Struct. Equ. Model. Multidiscip. J. 14, 464 – 504. https://doi.org/ 
10.1080/10705510701301834 . 
Chen, Y., Wang, Y., Nevo, S., Benitez, J., Kou, G., 2017. Improving strategic flexibility 
with information technologies: insights for firm performance in an emerging 
economy. J. Inf. Technol. 32, 10 – 25. https://doi.org/10.1057/jit.2015.26 . 
Child, D., 2006. The Essentials of Factor Analysis. A & C Black, London .  
Churchill, G.A., 1979. A paradigm for developing better measures of marketing 
constructs. J. Market. Res. 16, 64 – 73. https://www.jstor.org/stable/3150876 . 
Cohen, J., 1992. A power primer. Psychol. Bull. 112, 155 – 159. https://doi.org/10.1037/ 
0033-2909.112.1.155 . 
Creswell, J.W., 1994. Research Design: Qualitative and Quantitative Approaches. Sage 
Publications, Thousand Oaks .  
D ą browska, J., Almpanopoulou, A., Brem, A., Chesbrough, H., Cucino, V., Di Minin, A., 
Giones, F., Hakala, H., Marullo, C., Mention, A., Mortara, L., N ø rskov, S., Nylund, P. 
A., Oddo, C.M., Radziwon, A., Ritala, P., 2022. Digital transformation, for better or 
worse: a critical multi-level research agenda. RD Manag., radm.12531 https://doi. 
org/10.1111/radm.12531 . 
J. Kroh et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Technological Forecasting & Social Change 198 (2024) 122942
15
de Jong, M.G., Steenkamp, J.-B.E.M., Fox, J.-P., Baumgartner, H., 2008. Using item 
response theory to measure extreme response style in marketing research: a global 
investigation. J. Market. Res. 45, 104 – 115. https://doi.org/10.1509/jmkr.45.1.104 . 
de Massis, A., Audretsch, D., Uhlaner, L., Kammerlander, N., 2018. Innovation with 
limited resources: management lessons from the German Mittelstand. J. Prod. Innov. 
Manag. 35, 125 – 146. https://doi.org/10.1111/jpim.12373 . 
Del Giudice, M., Scuotto, V., Papa, A., Tarba, S.Y., Bresciani, S., Warkentin, M., 2021. 
A self – tuning model for smart manufacturing SMEs: effects on digital innovation. 
J. Prod. Innov. Manag. 38, 68 – 89. https://doi.org/10.1111/jpim.12560 . 
D ’ Ippolito, B., Messeni Petruzzelli, A., Panniello, U., 2019. Archetypes of incumbents ’ 
strategic responses to digital innovation. J. Intellect. Cap. 20, 662 – 679. https://doi. 
org/10.1108/JIC-04-2019-0065 . 
Eisenhardt, K.M., 1989. Building theories from case study research. Acad. Manage. Rev. 
14, 532. https://doi.org/10.2307/258557 . 
Eisenhardt, K.M., Graebner, M.E., 2007. Theory building from cases: opportunities and 
challenges. Acad. Manage. J. 50, 25 – 32. https://doi.org/10.5465/ 
amj.2007.24160888 . 
Eisenhardt, K.M., Martin, J.A., 2000. Dynamic capabilities: what are they? Strateg. 
Manag. J. 21, 1105 – 1121. https://doi.org/10.1002/1097-0266(200010/11)21:10/ 
11 < 1105::AID-SMJ133 > 3.0.CO;2-E . 
Fleiss, J.L., 1986. The Design and Analysis of Clinical Experiments. John Wiley & Sons, 
Ltd, New York .  
Flick, U., von Kardorff, E., Steinke, I. (Eds.), 2004. A Companion to Qualitative Research. 
Sage Publications, London, Thousand Oaks, Calif .  
Fornell, C., Larcker, D.F., 1981. Evaluating structural equation models with unobservable 
variables and measurement error. J. Market. Res. 18, 39 – 50. https://doi.org/ 
10.1177/002224378101800104 . 
Foss, N.J., Saebi, T., 2017. Fifteen years of research on business model innovation. 
J. Manag. 43, 200 – 227. https://doi.org/10.1177/0149206316675927 . 
Füller, J., Hutter, K., Wahl, J., Bilgram, V., Tekic, Z., 2022. How AI revolutionizes 
innovation management – perceptions and implementation preferences of AI-based 
innovators. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Change 178, 121598. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
techfore.2022.121598 . 
Gfrerer, A., Hutter, K., Füller, J., Str ¨ohle, T., 2021. Ready or not: managers ’ and 
employees ’ different perceptions of digital readiness. Calif. Manage. Rev. 63, 23 – 48. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0008125620977487 . 
Globocnik, D., Pe ˜na H ¨aufler, B., Salomo, S., 2022. Organizational antecedents to 
bootlegging and consequences for the newness of the innovation portfolio. J. Prod. 
Innov. Manag. 39, 717 – 745. https://doi.org/10.1111/jpim.12626 . 
Goffin, K., Ahlstr ¨om, P., Bianchi, M., Richtn ´er, A., 2019. State – of – the – art: the quality of 
case study research in innovation management. J. Prod. Innov. Manag. 36, 586 – 615. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/jpim.12492 . 
Griffin, A., Page, A.L., 1993. An interim report on measuring product development 
success and failure. J. Prod. Innov. Manag. 10, 291 – 308. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
0737-6782(93)90072-X . 
Hair, J.F., Black, W.C., Babin, B.J., Anderson, R.E., 2009. Multivariate Data Analysis, 7th 
ed. Pearson, Upper Saddle River .  
Hanelt, A., Bohnsack, R., Marz, D., Antunes Marante, C., 2021. A systematic review of the 
literature on digital transformation: insights and implications for strategy and 
organizational change. J. Manag. Stud. 58, 1159 – 1197. https://doi.org/10.1111/ 
joms.12639 . 
Hauschildt, J., 2010. Opposition to innovations — destructive or constructive? In: 
Brockhoff, K. (Ed.), The Dynamics of Innovation. Springer, Berlin, pp. 213 – 236. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-03988-5 ‗ 9 . 
Helfat, C.E., Finkelstein, S., Mitchell, W., Peteraf, M., Singh, H., Teece, D.J., Winter, S.G., 
2007. Dynamic Capabilities: Understanding Strategic Change in Organizations. 
Blackwell, Malden, MA .  
Hilbolling, S., Berends, H., Deken, F., Tuertscher, P., 2020. Complementors as 
connectors: managing open innovation around digital product platforms. RD Manag. 
50, 18 – 30. https://doi.org/10.1111/radm.12371 . 
Hinkin, T.R., 1995. A review of scale development practices in the study of 
organizations. J. Manag. 21, 967 – 988. https://doi.org/10.1177/ 
014920639502100509 . 
Hinkin, T.R., 1998. A brief tutorial on the development of measures for use in survey 
questionnaires. Organ. Res. Methods 1, 104 – 121. https://doi.org/10.1177/ 
109442819800100106 . 
Hu, L., Bentler, P.M., 1998. Fit indices in covariance structure modeling: sensitivity to 
underparameterized model misspecification. Psychol. Methods 3, 424 – 453. https:// 
doi.org/10.1037/1082-989X.3.4.424 . 
Huang, M.-H., Rust, R.T., 2018. Artificial intelligence in service. J. Serv. Res. 21, 
155 – 172. https://doi.org/10.1177/1094670517752459 . 
Huber, F., Wainwright, T., Rentocchini, F., 2020. Open data for open innovation: 
managing absorptive capacity in SMEs. RD Manag. 50, 31 – 46. https://doi.org/ 
10.1111/radm.12347 . 
Hund, A., Wagner, H.-T., Beimborn, D., Weitzel, T., 2021. Digital innovation: review and 
novel perspective. J. Strateg. Inf. Syst. 30, 101695 https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jsis.2021.101695 . 
Juntunen, J.K., Halme, M., Korsunova, A., Rajala, R., 2019. Strategies for integrating 
stakeholders into sustainability innovation: a configurational perspective. J. Prod. 
Innov. Manag. 36, 331 – 355. https://doi.org/10.1111/jpim.12481 . 
Kindermann, B., Beutel, S., Garcia de Lomana, G., Strese, S., Bendig, D., Brettel, M., 2020. 
Digital orientation: conceptualization and operationalization of a new strategic 
orientation. Eur. Manag. J. 18, 513. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.emj.2020.10.009 . 
Kline, R.B., 2005. Principles and Practice of Structural Equation Modeling, 2nd ed. 
Guilford Press . 
Kohli, R., Melville, N.P., 2018. Digital innovation: a review and synthesis. Inf. Syst. J. 29, 
200 – 223. https://doi.org/10.1111/isj.12193 . 
K ¨onig, A., Kammerlander, N., Enders, A., 2013. The family innovator ’ s dilemma: how 
family influence affects the adoption of discontinuous technologies by incumbent 
firms. Acad. Manage. Rev. 38, 418 – 441. https://doi.org/10.5465/amr.2011.0162 . 
K ¨onig, A., Graf-Vlachy, L., Sch ¨oberl, M., 2021. Opportunity/threat perception and inertia 
in response to discontinuous change: replicating and extending Gilbert (2005). 
J. Manag. 47, 771 – 816. https://doi.org/10.1177/0149206320908630 . 
Kroh, J., Luetjen, H., Globocnik, D., Schultz, C., 2018. Use and efficacy of information 
technology in innovation processes: the specific role of servitization. J. Prod. Innov. 
Manag. 35, 720 – 741. https://doi.org/10.1111/jpim.12445 . 
Lane, P.J., Lubatkin, M., 1998. Relative absorptive capacity and interorganizational 
learning. Strateg. Manag. J. 19, 461 – 477 . 
Lanzolla, G., Lorenz, A., Miron-Spektor, E., Schilling, M., Solinas, G., Tucci, C.L., 2020. 
Digital transformation: what is new if anything? Emerging patterns and management 
research. Acad. Manag. Discov. 6, 341 – 350 . 
LeBreton, J.M., Senter, J.L., 2008. Answers to 20 questions about interrater reliability 
and interrater agreement. Organ. Res. Methods 11, 815 – 852. https://doi.org/ 
10.1177/1094428106296642 . 
Leonard-Barton, D., 1990. A dual methodology for case studies: synergistic use of a 
longitudinal single site with replicated multiple sites. Organ. Sci. 1, 248 – 266. 
https://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.1.3.248 . 
Lokuge, S., Sedera, D., Grover, V., Dongming, X., 2019. Organizational readiness for 
digital innovation: development and empirical calibration of a construct. Inf. 
Manage. 56, 445 – 461. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.im.2018.09.001 . 
Lyytinen, K., Yoo, Y., Boland Jr., R.J., 2016. Digital product innovation within four 
classes of innovation networks. Inf. Syst. J. 26, 47 – 75. https://doi.org/10.1111/ 
isj.12093 . 
Mancha, R., Shankaranarayanan, G., 2020. Making a digital innovator: antecedents of 
innovativeness with digital technologies. Inf. Technol. People 34, 318 – 335. https:// 
doi.org/10.1108/ITP-12-2018-0577 . 
Manion, M.T., Cherion, J., 2009. Impact of strategic type on success measures for product 
development projects*. J. Prod. Innov. Manag. 26, 71 – 85. https://doi.org/10.1111/ 
j.1540-5885.2009.00335.x . 
Markham, S.K., 2000. Corporate championing and antagonism as forms of political 
behavior: an R & D perspective. Organ. Sci. 11, 429 – 447. https://doi.org/10.1287/ 
orsc.11.4.429.14599 . 
Marsh, H.W., Guo, J., Parker, P.D., Nagengast, B., Asparouhov, T., Muth ´en, B., Dicke, T., 
2018. What to do when scalar invariance fails: the extended alignment method for 
multi-group factor analysis comparison of latent means across many groups. Psychol. 
Methods 23, 524 – 545. https://doi.org/10.1037/met0000113 . 
Marsh, E., Vallejos, E.P., Spence, A., 2022. The digital workplace and its dark side: an 
integrative review. Comput. Hum. Behav. 128, 107118 https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
chb.2021.107118 . 
Menz, M., Kunisch, S., Birkinshaw, J., Collis, D.J., Foss, N.J., Hoskisson, R.E., Prescott, J. 
E., 2021. Corporate strategy and the theory of the firm in the digital age. J. Manag. 
Stud. 58, 1695 – 1720. https://doi.org/10.1111/joms.12760 . 
Meredith, W., 1993. Measurement invariance, factor analysis and factorial invariance. 
Psychometrika 58, 525 – 543 . 
Muehlburger, M., Krumay, B., Koch, S., Currle, S., 2022. Individual digital 
transformation readiness: conceptualisation and scale development. Int. J. Innov. 
Manag. 26, 2240013. https://doi.org/10.1142/S1363919622400138 . 
Nambisan, S., Lyytinen, K., Majchrzak, A., Song, M., 2017. Digital Innovation 
Management: reinventing innovation management research in a digital world. MIS 
Q. 41, 223 – 228 . 
Nambisan, Wright, M., Feldman, M., 2019. The digital transformation of innovation and 
entrepreneurship: progress, challenges and key themes. Res. Policy 48, 103773. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2019.03.018 . 
Nauhaus, S., Luger, J., Raisch, S., 2021. Strategic decision making in the digital age: 
expert sentiment and corporate capital allocation. J. Manag. Stud. 58, 1933 – 1961. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/joms.12742 . 
Nunnally, J.C., Bernstein, I.H., 1994. Psychometric Theory. McGrawHill . 
Pe ˜na H ¨aufler, B., Globocnik, D., Landaeta Saldías, P., Salomo, S., 2021. Rapid validity 
testing at the front end of innovation. J. Prod. Innov. Manag. 38, 447 – 472. https:// 
doi.org/10.1111/jpim.12585 . 
Putnick, D.L., Bornstein, M.H., 2016. Measurement invariance conventions and 
reporting: the state of the art and future directions for psychological research. Dev. 
Rev. 41, 71 – 90. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dr.2016.06.004 . 
Rauch, E., Linder, C., Dallasega, P., 2020. Anthropocentric perspective of production 
before and within Industry 4.0. Comput. Ind. Eng. 139, 105644 https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.cie.2019.01.018 . 
Rindfleisch, A., O ’ Hern, M., Sachdev, V., 2017. The digital revolution, 3D printing, and 
innovation as data. J. Prod. Innov. Manag. 34, 681 – 690. https://doi.org/10.1111/ 
jpim.12402 . 
Rummel, F., Hüsig, S., Steinhauser, S., 2022. Two archetypes of business model 
innovation processes for manufacturing firms in the context of digital 
transformation. RD Manag., radm.12514 https://doi.org/10.1111/radm.12514 . 
Schallmo, D., Williams, C.A., Tidd, J., 2022. The art of holistic digitalisation: a meta-view 
on strategy, transformation, implementation, and maturity. Int. J. Innov. Manag. 26, 
2240007. https://doi.org/10.1142/S1363919622400072 . 
Schultz, C., Globocnik, D., Kock, A., Salomo, S., 2019. Application and performance 
impact of stage-gate systems - the role services in the firm ’ s business focus. RD 
Manag. 49, 534 – 554. https://doi.org/10.1111/radm.12341 . 
Sedera, D., Lokuge, S., Grover, V., Sarker, Suprateek, Sarker, Saonee, 2016. Innovating 
with enterprise systems and digital platforms: a contingent resource-based theory 
view. Inf. Manage. 53, 366 – 379. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.im.2016.01.001 . 
J. Kroh et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Technological Forecasting & Social Change 198 (2024) 122942
16
Selander, L., Henfridsson, O., Svahn, F., 2010. Transforming ecosystem relationships in 
digital innovation. In: ICIS 2010 Proc, p. 138 . 
Shrout, P.E., Fleiss, J.L., 1979. Intraclass correlations: uses in assessing rater reliability. 
Psychol. Bull. 86, 420 – 428. https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-2909.86.2.420 . 
Siggelkow, N., 2007. Persuasion with case studies. Acad. Manage. J. 50, 20 – 24. https:// 
doi.org/10.5465/amj.2007.24160882 . 
Steenkamp, J.E.M., Baumgartner, H., 1998. Assessing measurement invariance in cross- 
national consumer research. J. Consum. Res. 25, 78 – 107. https://doi.org/10.1086/ 
209528 . 
Steinmetz, H., 2013. Analyzing observed composite differences across groups: is partial 
measurement invariance enough? Methodology 9, 1 – 12. https://doi.org/10.1027/ 
1614-2241/a000049 . 
Svahn, F., Mathiassen, L., Lindgren, R., 2017a. Embracing digital innovation in 
incumbent firms: how Volvo cars managed competing concerns. MIS Q. 41, 
239 – 253. https://doi.org/10.25300/misq/2017/41.1.12 . 
Svahn, F., Mathiassen, L., Lindgren, R., Kane, G.C., 2017b. Mastering the digital 
innovation challenge. MITSloan Manag. Rev. 58, 14 – 16 . 
Teece, D.J., 2007. Explicating dynamic capabilities: the nature and microfoundations of 
(sustainable) enterprise performance. Strateg. Manag. J. 28, 1319 – 1350. https://doi. 
org/10.1002/smj.640 . 
Teece, D.J., Pisano, G., Shuen, A., 1997. Dynamic capabilities and strategic management. 
Strateg. Manag. J. 18, 509 – 533. https://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1097-0266(199708) 
18:7 < 509::AID-SMJ882 > 3.0.CO;2-Z . 
Troise, C., Corvello, V., Ghobadian, A., O ’ Regan, N., 2022. How can SMEs successfully 
navigate VUCA environment: the role of agility in the digital transformation era. 
Technol. Forecast. Soc. Change 174, 121227. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
techfore.2021.121227 . 
Tuomi, I., 2002. Networks of Innovation: Change and Meaning in the Age of the Internet. 
Oxford University Press, Oxford .  
Urbinati, A., Chiaroni, D., Chiesa, V., Frattini, F., 2020. The role of digital technologies in 
open innovation processes: an exploratory multiple case study analysis. RD Manag. 
50, 136 – 160. https://doi.org/10.1111/radm.12313 . 
VERBI Software, 2019. MAXQDA 2020 [Computer Software] . 
Williams, C.A., Schallmo, D., Scornavacca, E., 2022. How applicable are digital maturity 
models to SMEs?: a conceptual framework and empirical validation approach. Int. J. 
Innov. Manag. 26, 2240010. https://doi.org/10.1142/S1363919622400102 . 
Wirtz, B.W., Weyerer, J.C., Heckeroth, J.K., 2022. Digital disruption and digital 
transformation: a strategic integrative framework. Int. J. Innov. Manag. 26, 
2240008. https://doi.org/10.1142/S1363919622400084 . 
Yoo, 2010. Computing in everyday life: a call for research on experiential computing. 
MIS Q. 34, 213. https://doi.org/10.2307/20721425 . 
Yoo, Y., Henfridsson, O., Lyytinen, K., 2010. Research commentary — the new organizing 
logic of digital innovation: an agenda for information systems research. Inf. Syst. 
Res. 21, 724 – 735. https://doi.org/10.1287/isre.1100.0322 . 
Yoo, Y., Boland, R.J., Lyytinen, K., Majchrzak, A., 2012. Organizing for innovation in the 
digitized world. Organ. Sci. 23, 1398 – 1408. https://doi.org/10.1287/ 
orsc.1120.0771 . 
Dr. Julia Kroh is a postdoctoral researcher at the Chair of Technology Management at the 
Institute for Innovation Research at Kiel University, Germany. Her research focuses on 
stakeholder management in complex innovation processes. Her research fields comprise 
the management of complex innovation processes like digital innovation, service inno -
vation, and urban innovation. Her work was already published in the Journal of Product 
Innovation Management and Technological Forecasting and Social Change. 
PD Dr. Dietfried Globocnik works as senior scientist at the University of Klagenfurt and 
the University of Graz. He holds a doctorate in social and economic sciences from the 
University of Graz and a habilitation in business administration from the University of 
Klagenfurt. His research interest entails innovation marketing, corporate entrepreneurship 
and organizing innovation activities in MNEs. His academic work is published in books and 
journals such as Journal of Product Innovation Management, Technovation and European 
Management Journal. 
Prof. Dr. Carsten Schultz is a professor for Technology Management at the Institute for 
Innovation Research at Kiel University, Germany. He received his doctorate from Berlin 
University of Technology. His research concentrates on innovation and network man -
agement with on focus digital services. Further research interests include the management 
of radical innovations and university – industry collaborations. He has published several 
articles in academic journals as well as a number of books including a widely used textbook 
on innovation management. 
Frederike Holdhof is a PhD student at the Chair of Technology Management at the 
Institute for Innovation Research at Kiel University, Germany. Her research focuses on 
digital innovation development in mid-sized and established firms. 
Prof. Dr. S ø ren Salomo holds the Chair of Technology and Innovation Management at 
Technische Universit ¨at Berlin. He is also professor for innovation management at the 
Center for Entrepreneurship at DTU, Copenhagen. He holds a diploma and a doctorate in 
business administration from Kiel University. His research interests entail corporate 
innovation management with a special focus on process and organizational system 
mechanisms for supporting radical innovation. His work is published in journals, such as 
the Research Policy, Creativity and Innovation, Management, and Journal of Product 
Innovation Management. 
J. Kroh et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
